
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Chapter 17 
Heterogeneous 
Reactions-Introduction 
The second half of this book treats the kinetics and design of chemical reactors 
for heterogeneous systems of various kinds, each chapter considering a different 
system (see Chapter 1 for discussions of heterogeneous and homogeneous sys- 
tems). For these systems there are two complicating factors that must be ac- 
counted for beyond what is normally considered in homogeneous systems. First, 
we have the complication of the rate expression, and second the complication 
of the contacting patterns for two-phase systems. Let us briefly discuss these 
in turn. 
The Complications of the Rate Equation. Since more than one phase is present, 
the movement of material from phase to phase must be considered in the rate 
equation. Thus the rate expression in general will incorporate mass transfer 
terms in addition to the usual chemical kinetics term. These mass transfer terms 
are different in type and numbers in the different kinds of heterogeneous systems; 
hence, no single rate expression has general application. Here are some sim- 
ple examples. 
THE BURNING OF A CARBON PARTICLE IN AIR 
Tell how many rate steps are involved. The kinetics is given by 
C + O,+CO, 
and ignore the possible formation of CO. 
From Fig. E17.1 we see that two steps in series are involved-mass 
transfer of 
oxygen to the surface followed by reaction at the surface of the particle. 
369 


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
370 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
J' 
r,sJ;,. 
Model - 
' 3 2  
Burning carbon particle 
Gas film 
Fig. E17.1 
AEROBIC FERMENTATION 
w many rate steps are involved when air bubbles through a tank of liquid 
product material. 
From Fig. E17.2 we see that there are up to seven possible resistance steps, only 
one involving the reaction. How many you choose to consider depends on you 
and on the situation. 
To get an overall rate expression, write the individual rate steps on the same 
basis (unit surface of burning particle, unit volume of fermenter, unit volume of 
cells, etc.). 
1 dNA - 
mol A reacted 
- T A =  
V dt 
volume of reactor fluid. time 


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
371 
1 dNA 
mol A reacted 
- r i =  
- 
- 
W dt 
mass of solid. time 
1 dNA - 
mol A reacted 
-rL= 
S dt 
interfacial surface. time 
Now put all the mass transfer and reaction steps into the same rate form and 
then combine. Thus 
mol A reacted - 
- (-rA)v = ( - r i ) W  = (-rL)S 
time 
and if the steps are in series, as in Examples 17.1 and 17.2 
roverall = r1 = r2 = r3 
If they are in parallel 
Consider steps in series. In general, if all the steps are linear in concentration, 
then it is easy to combine them. However, if any of the steps are nonlinear, then 
you will get a messy overall expression. Therefore, you may try to bypass this 
nonlinear step in one of various ways. Approximating the r, versus C, 
curve by 
a first-order expression is probably the most useful procedure. 
Another point: in combining rates we normally do not know the concentration 
of materials at intermediate conditions, so these are the concentrations that we 
eliminate in combining rates. Example 17.3 shows this. 


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
372 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
0 VERALL RATE FOR A LINEAR PROCESS 
Dilute A diffuses through a stagnant liquid film onto a plane surface consisting 
of B, reacts there to produce R which diffuses back into the mainstream. Develop 
the overall rate expression for the L/S reaction 
A(1) + B (s) -+ R(1) 
which takes place on this flat surface, see Fig. E17.3. 
Figure E17.3. 
SOLUTION 
I 
By diffusion, the flux of A to the surface is 
Reaction is first order with respect to A, so based on unit surface 
At steady state the flow rate to the surface is equal to the reaction rate at the 
surface (steps in series). So 
and from Eqs. (i) and (ii) 


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
373 
from which 
(iii) 
Replacing Eq. (iii) into either Eq. (i) or Eq. (ii) then eliminates C, which cannot 
be measured, giving 
Comment This result shows that llk, and llk" are additive resistances. It so 
happens that the addition of resistances to obtain on overall resistance is permissi- 
ble only when the rate is a linear function of the driving force and when the 
processes occur in series. 
OVERALL RATE FOR A NONLINEAR PROCESS 
Repeat Example 17.3 with just one change: let the reaction step be second order 
with respect to A, or 
1 SOLUTION 
Combining the reaction steps to eliminate C, 
as was done in Example 17.3, is 
now not so simple, and gives 
Contacting Patterns for Two-Phase Systems 
There are many ways that two phases can be contacted, and for each the design 
equation will be unique. Design equations for these ideal flow patterns may 
be developed without too much difficulty. However, when real flow deviates 
considerably from these, we can do one of two things: we may develop models 
to mirror actual flow closely, or we may calculate performance with ideal patterns 
which "bracket" actual flow. Fortunately, most real reactors for heterogeneous 
systems can be satisfactorily approximated by one of the five ideal flow patterns 
of Fig. 17.1. Notable exceptions are the reactions which take place in fluidized 
beds. There special models must be developed. 


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
374 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
Plug Alplug B 
Plug Alplug B 
Plug Alplug B 
countercurrent 
cocurrent 
crosscurrent 
Micro-micro 
Reaction in either 
A or B phase 
A 
Reaction in either 
Plug Almixed B 
Mixed Alrnixed B 
(two cases) 
(two cases) 
Figure 17.1. Ideal contacting patterns for two flowing fluids. 
Final Thoughts on Flow Modeling 
In reactor design and scale-up, it is essential to select a flow model which reason- 
ably represents our setup. Too often we put too little thought here, carelessly 
picking a nonrepresentative model and then doing computer calculations to the 
nth degree of accuracy. And then we are surprised when design and scale-up do 
not agree with our predictions. A simple reasonable model is much better than 
a precise and detailed model which does not represent the contacting. Often the 
choice of a good flow model and the knowledge of how the flow pattern changes 
with scale-up spells the difference between success and failure. 
The preceding thoughts guide us in our approach to heterogeneous reaction, 
which we will consider in the rest of the book. 
PROBLEMS 
17.1. Gaseous reactant A diffuses through a gas film and reacts on the surface 
of a solid according to a reversible first-order rate, 
where CA, is the concentration of A in equilibrium with the solid surface. 
Develop an expression for the rate of reaction of A accounting for both 
the mass transfer and reaction steps. 


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Problems 375 
17.2. Example 17.4 gives the final rate expression for film mass transfer followed 
by a second-order rate expression for reaction on a plane surface. Please 
derive this expression and show that it is correct. 
17.3. In slurry reactors, pure reactant gas is bubbled through liquid containing 
suspended catalyst particles. Let us view these kinetics in terms of the film 
theory, as shown in Fig. P17.3. Thus, to reach the surface of the solid, the 
Typical liquid- 
Figure P17.3 
reactant which enters the liquid must diffuse through the liquid film into 
the main body of liquid, and then through the film surrounding the catalyst 
particle. At the surface of the particle, reactant yields product according 
to first-order kinetics. Derive an expression for the rate of reaction in terms 
of these resistances. 


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
Chapter 18 
Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
With many reactions, the rates are affected by materials which are neither re- 
actants nor products. Such materials called catalysts can speed a reaction by a 
factor of a million or much more, or they may slow a reaction (negative catalyst). 
There are two broad classes of catalysts: those that operate at close to ambient 
temperature with biochemical systems, and the man-made catalysts that operate 
at high temperature. 
The biochemical catalysts, called enzymes, are found everywhere in the bio- 
chemical world and in living creatures, and without their action I doubt that life 
could exist at all. In addition, in our bodies hundreds of different enzymes and 
other catalysts are busily at work all the time, keeping us alive. We treat these 
catalysts in Chapter 27. 
The man-made catalysts, mostly solids, usually aim to cause the high-tempera- 
ture rupture or synthesis of materials. These reactions play an important role in 
many industrial processes, such as the production of methanol, sulfuric acid, 
ammonia, and various petrochemicals, polymers, paints, and plastics. It is esti- 
mated that well over 50% of all the chemical products produced today are made 
with the use of catalysts. These materials, their reaction rates, and the reactors 
that use them are the concern of this chapter and Chapters 19-22. 
Consider petroleum. Since this consists of a mixture of many compounds, 
primarily hydrocarbons, its treatment under extreme conditions will cause a 
variety of changes to occur simultaneously, producing a spectrum of compounds, 
some desirable, others undesirable. Although a catalyst can easily speed the rate 
of reactions a thousandfold or a millionfold, still, when a variety of reactions 
are encountered, the most important characteristic of a catalyst is its selectivity. 
By this we mean that it only changes the rates of certain reactions, often a single 
reaction, leaving the rest unaffected. Thus, in the presence of an appropriate 
catalyst, products containing predominantly the materials desired can be obtained 
from a given feed. 
The following are some general observations. 
1. The selection of a catalyst to promote a reaction is not well understood; 
therefore, in practice extensive trial and error may be needed to produce 
a satisfactory catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
18.1 The Rate Equation for Surface Kinetics 377 
2. Duplication of the chemical constitution of a good catalyst is no guarantee 
that the solid produced will have any catalytic activity. This observation 
suggests that it is the physical or crystalline structure which somehow imparts 
catalytic activity to a material. This view is strengthened by the fact that 
heating a catalyst above a certain critical temperature may cause it to lose 
its activity, often permanently. Thus present research on catalysts is strongly 
centered on the surface structure of solids. 
3. To explain the action of catalysts, it is thought that reactant molecules are 
somehow changed, energized, or affected to form intermediates in the 
regions close to the catalyst surface. Various theories have been proposed 
to explain the details of this action. In one theory, the intermediate is viewed 
as an association of a reactant molecule with a region of the surface; in 
other words, the molecules are somehow attached to the surface. In another 
theory, molecules are thought to move down into the atmosphere close to 
the surface and be under the influence of surface forces. In this view the 
molecules are still mobile but are nevertheless modified. In still a third 
theory, it is thought that an active complex, a free radical, is formed at the 
surface of the catalyst. This free radical then moves back into the main gas 
stream, triggering a chain of reactions with fresh molecules before being 
finally destroyed. In contrast with the first two theories, which consider the 
reaction to occur in the vicinity of the surface, this theory views the catalyst 
surface simply as a generator of free radicals, with the reaction occurring 
in the main body of the gas. 
4. In terms of the transition-state theory, the catalyst reduces the potential 
energy barrier over which the reactants must pass to form products. This 
lowering in energy barrier is shown in Fig. 18.1. 
5. Though a catalyst may speed up a reaction, it never determines the equilib- 
rium or endpoint of a reaction. This is governed by thermodynamics alone. 
Thus with or without a catalyst the equilibrium constant for the reaction 
is always the same. 
Without catalyst the complex 
has high potential energy 
resulting in low rate of reaction 
With catalyst the lower 
energy barrier allows 
higher rate of reaction 
Final 
- I 
state 
Reactants 
Complex 
Products 
* 
Reaction path 
Figure 18.1 Representation of the action of a catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
378 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
6. Since the solid surface is responsible for catalytic activity, a large readily 
accessible surface in easily handled materials is desirable. By a variety of 
methods, active surface areas the size of football fields can be obtained per 
cubic centimeter of catalyst. 
Though there are many problems related to solid catalysts, we consider only 
those which are related to the development of kinetic rate equations needed in 
design. We simply assume that we have a catalyst available to promote a specific 
reaction. We wish to evaluate the kinetic behavior of reactants in the presence 
of this material and then use this information for design. 
The Spectrum of Kinetic Regimes 
Consider a porous catalyst particle bathed by reactant A. The rate of reaction 
of A for the particle as a whole may depend on: 
O Surface kinetics, or what happens at the surfaces, interior or exterior of 
the particle. This may involve the adsorption of reactant A onto the surface, 
reaction on the surface, or desorption of product back into the gas stream. 
O Pore diffusion resistance which may cause the interior of the particle to 
be starved for reactant. 
O Particle AT or temperature gradients within the particle. This is caused by 
large heat release or absorption during reaction. 
0 
Film AT between the outer surface of the particle and the main gas stream. 
For example, the particle may be uniform in temperature throughout but 
hotter than the surrounding gas. 
0 Film diffusion resistance or concentration gradients across the gas film 
surrounding the particle. 
For gaslporous catalyst systems slow reactions are influenced by O alone, in 
faster reactions O intrudes to slow the rate, then O and/or 0 
enter the picture, 
O unlikely limits the overall rate. In liquid systems the order in which these 
effects intrude is O, 
0, 
0 ,  and rarely O andlor 0. 
In different areas of application (outside of catalytic kinetics too) different 
combinations of these five factors enter the picture. Table 18.1 shows what we 
normally encounter. 
Table 18.1 Factors which Influence the Rate of Reaction of Particles 
Porous 
Catalyst 
Burning of 
Cells and 
Rate Influencing 
Catalyst 
Coated 
a Droplet 
Simple Living 
Factor 
Particle 
Surface 
of Fuel 
Creatures 
O Surface reaction 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
O Pore diffusion 
Yes 
No 
No 
Maybe 
O Particle AT 
Not too likely 
No 
No 
No 
0 Film AT 
Sometimes 
Rare 
All important 
No 
O Film mass transfer 
No 
Yes 
All important 
Could be 


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
18.1 The Rate Equation for Surface Kinetics 379 
Although here we introduce all the phenomena which affect the rate, the real 
world is never so exciting that we have to concern ourselves with all five factors 
at any one time. In fact, in the majority of situations with porous catalyst particles 
we only have to consider factors @ and 0. 
Here let us treat factors O and 0; then O and @ briefly. 
18.1 THE RATE EQUATION FOR SURFACE KINETICS 
Because of the great industrial importance of catalytic reactions, considerable 
effort has been spent in developing theories from which kinetic equations can 
rationally be developed. The most useful for our purposes supposes that the 
reaction takes place on an active site on the surface of the catalyst. Thus three 
steps are viewed to occur successively at the surface. 
Step 1. A molecule is adsorbed onto the surface and is attached to an active site. 
Step 2. It then reacts either with another molecule on an adjacent site (dual- 
site mechanism), with one coming from the main gas stream (single-site mecha- 
nism), or it simply decomposes while on the site (single-site mechanism). 
Step 3. Products are desorbed from the surface, which then frees the site. 
In addition, all species of molecules, free reactants, and free products as well 
as site-attached reactants, intermediates, and products taking part in these three 
processes are assumed to be in equilibrium. 
Rate expressions derived from various postulated mechanisms are all of the 
form 
(kinetic term)(driving force or displacement from equilibrium) 
rate of reaction = 
(resistance term) 
For example, for the reaction 
occurring in the presence of inert carrier material U, the rate expression when 
adsorption of A controls is 
When reaction between adjacent site-attached molecules of A and B controls, 
the rate expression is 


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
380 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
whereas for desorption of R, controlling it becomes 
Each detailed mechanism of reaction with its controlling factor has its corre- 
sponding rate equation, involving anywhere from three to seven arbitrary con- 
stants, the K values. For reasons to be made clear, we do not intend to use 
equations such as these. Consequently, we do not go into their derivations. These 
are given by Hougen and Watson (1947), Corrigan (1954, 1955), Walas (1959), 
and elsewhere. 
Now, in terms of the contact time or space time, most catalytic conversion 
data can be fitted adequately by relatively simple first- or nth-order rate expres- 
sions (see Prater and Lago, 1956). Since this is so, why should we concern 
ourselves with selecting one of a host of rather complicated rate expressions 
which satisfactorily fits the data? 
The following discussion summarizes the arguments for and against the use 
of simple empirical kinetic equations. 
Truth and Predictability. The strongest argument in favor of searching for the 
actual mechanism is that if we find one which we think represents what truly 
occurs, extrapolation to new and more favorable operating conditions is much 
more safely done. This is a powerful argument. Other arguments, such as aug- 
menting knowledge of the mechanism of catalysis with the final goal of producing 
better catalysts in the future, do not concern a design engineer who has a specific 
catalyst at hand. 
Problems of Finding the Mechanism. To prove that we have such a mechanism 
we must show that the family of curves representing the rate equation type of 
the favored mechanism fits the data so much better than the other families that 
all the others can be rejected. With the large number of parameters (three to 
seven) that can be chosen arbitrarily for each rate-controlling mechanism, a very 
extensive experimental program is required, using very precise and reproducible 
data, which in itself is quite a problem. We should bear in mind that it is not 
good enough to select the mechanism that well fits-or even best fits-the data. 
Difference in fit may be explainable entirely in terms of experimental error. In 
statistical terms these differences may not be "significant." Unfortunately, if a 
number of alternative mechanisms fit the data equally well, we must recognize 
that the equation selected can only be considered to be one of good fit, not one 
that represents reality. With this admitted, there is no reason why we should not 
use the simplest and easiest-to-handle equation of satisfactory fit. In fact, unless 
there are good positive reasons for using the more complicated of two equations, 
we should always select the simpler of the two if both fit the data equally well. 
The statistical analyses and comments by Chou (1958) on the codimer example 
in Hougen and Watson (1947) in which 18 mechanisms were examined illustrate 
the difficulty in finding the correct mechanism from kinetic data, and show that 
even in the most carefully conducted programs of experimentation the magnitude 
of the experimental error will very likely mask the differences predicted by the 
various mechanisms. 


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
18.2 Pore Diffusion Resistance Combined with Surface Kinetics 381 
Thus it is hardly ever possible to determine with reasonable confidence which 
is the correct mechanism. 
Problems of Combining Resistances. Suppose that we have found the correct 
mechanism and resultant rate equation for the surface phenomenon. Combining 
this step with any of the other resistance steps, such as pore of film diffusion, 
becomes rather impractical. When this has to be done, it is best to replace the 
multiconstant rate equation by an equivalent first-order expression, which can 
then be combined with other reaction steps to yield an overall rate expression. 
Summary on Surface Kinetics. From this discussion we conclude that it is good 
enough to use the simplest available correlating rate expression, hence first-order 
or nth-order kinetics, to represent the surface reaction. 
For additional comments questioning the validity of the active-site approach, 
suggesting forms of kinetic equations to be used in reactor design, and suggesting 
what is the real utility of the active site theory, see the opposing points of view 
presented by Weller (1956) and Boudart (1956). 
18.2 PORE DIFFUSION RESISTANCE COMBINED WITH SURFACE 
KINETICS 
Single Cylindrical Pore, First-Order Reaction 
First consider a single cylindrical pore of length L, with reactant A diffusing into 
the pore, and reacting on the surface by a first-order reaction 
I dNA 
A+product 
and 
-rlk,=---- S dt - PC, 
taking place at the walls of the pore, and product diffusing out of the pore, as 
shown in Fig. 18.2. This simple model will later be extended. 
The flow of materials into and out of any section of pore is shown in detail 
in Fig. 18.3. At steady state a material balance for reactant A for this elementary 
section gives 
output - input + disappearance by reaction = 0 
(4.1) 
or with the quantities shown in Fig. 18.3, 
Rearranging gives 


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
382 Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Elementary section of catalyst 
pore shown in Fig. 3 
Distance along pore, x 
Figure 18.2 Representation of a cylindrical catalyst 
pore. 
and taking the limit as Ax approaches zero (see the equation above Eq. 13.18a), 
we obtain 
Note that the first-order chemical reaction is expressed in terms of unit surface 
area of the wall of the catalyst pore; hence k" has unit of length per time (see 
Mantle area on which reaction 
Cross-sectional area = Pr2 
/ 
is occurring, S = 2.rrrA.x 
Flow out 
* 
(2IOut= 
-nrz 9 (%) 
out 
I 
Lhl 
Xin 
xout 
Disappearance of A 
= rate of disappearance 
( 
(surface) 
on surface by reaction 
unit surface 
= (- b %) (surface) = X " C ~  
(Znr AX) 
Figure 18.3 Setting up the material balance for the elementary slice 
of catalyst pore. 


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
18.2 Pore Diffusion Resistance Combined with Surface Kinetics 383 
Eq. 1.4). In general, the interrelation between rate constants on different bases 
is given by 
Hence for the cylindrical catalyst pore 
Thus in terms of volumetric units Eq. 3 becomes 
This is a frequently met linear differential equation whose general solution is 
where 
and where MI and M2 are constants. It is in the evaluation of these constants 
that we restrict the solution to this system alone. We do this by specifying what 
is particular about the model selected, a procedure which requires a clear picture 
of what the model is supposed to represent. These specifications are called the 
boundary conditions of the problem. Since two constants are to be evaluated, 
we must find and specify two boundary conditions. Examining the physical limits 
of the conceptual pore, we find that the following statements can always be 
made. First, at the pore entrance 
Second, because there is no flux or movement of material through the interior 
end of the pore 
With the appropriate mathematical manipulations of Eqs. 7 and 8 we then obtain 


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
384 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Fractional distance into pore, xlL 
Figure 18.4 Distribution and average value of reactant concentration within a catalyst 
pore as a function of the parameter mL = L- 
Hence the concentration of reactant within the pore is 
CA - em(L-x) + e-m(L-x) cosh m(L - x) 
-- 
- 
- 
c* 
 em^ + e - m ~  
cosh mL 
(10) 
This progressive drop in concentration on moving into the pore is shown in Fig. 
18.4, and this is seen to be dependent on the dimensionless quantity mL, or M,, 
called the Thiele modulus. 
To measure how much the reaction rate is lowered because of the resistance 
to pore diffusion, define the quantity Bcalled the effectiveness factor as follows: 
(actual mean reaction rate within pore) 
Effectiveness factor, 6= (rate if not slowed by pore diffusion) 
(11) 
- 
- 
- 
r ~ ,  
with diffusion 
r ~ ,  
without diffusion resistance 
In particular, for first-order reactions 6= CA/Ch because the rate is proportional 
to the concentration. Evaluating the average rate in the pore from Eq. 10 gives 


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 385 
with sealed ends 
"\ \.\\ 
Volume change on reaction 
\ 
= 1 + E X  = 1, no volume change 
= 2, volume doubles 
= 3, 
volume halves 
\ 
\ 
Thiele modulus: mL = ~m 
Figure 18.5 The effectiveness factor as a function of the parame- 
ter mL or M,, called the Thiele modulus, prepared from Aris 
(1957) and Thiele (1939). 
the relationship 
- 
- CA - tanh mL 
&first order - - 
- 
C, 
mL 
which is shown by the solid line in Fig. 5. With this figure we can tell whether pore 
diffusion modifies the rate of reaction, and inspection shows that this depends on 
whether mL is large or small. 
For small mL, or mL < 0.4, we see that & = 1, the concentration of reactant 
does not drop appreciably within the pore; thus pore diffusion offers negligible 
resistance. This can also be verified by noting that a small value for mL = 
L 
means either a short pore, slow reaction, or rapid diffusion, all three 
factors tending to lower the resistance to diffusion. 
For large mL, or mL > 4, we find that G = llmL, the reactant concentration 
drops rapidly to zero on moving into the pore, hence diffusion strongly influences 
the rate of reaction. We call this the regime of strong pore resistance. 
18.3 POROUS CATALYST PARTICLES 
The results for a single pore can approximate the behavior or particles of various 
shapes-spheres, cylinders, etc. For these systems the following apply. 
1. Use of the proper diffusion cog$cient. Replace the molecular diffusion 
coefficient CB by the effective diffusion coefficient of fluid in the porous 
structure. Representative gk values for gases and liquids in porous solids 
are given by Weisz (1959). 
2. Proper measure of particle size. To find the effective distance penetrated 


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
386 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
by gas to get to all the interior surfaces we define a characteristic size 
of particle 
volume of particle 
, any particle shape 
= lexterior surface available 
I 
{for reactant penetration / 
thickness , for flat plates 
L 
= -, for cylinders 
I 
= f, 
for spheres 
3. Measures of reactions rates. In catalytic systems the rate of reaction can 
be expressed in one of many equivalent ways. For example, for first-or- 
der kinetics 
Based on volume of 
ldNA-kG,[ mols reacted 
voids in the reactor 
-rA= 
V dt 
m3 voids. s 
Based on weight of 
1 dNA 
-ra = - -- - 
mol reacted 
catalyst pellets 
W dt - ktCA, [ kgcat.s ] 
(15) 
1 dNA 
mol reacted 
Based on catalyst surface - r l  = - - - 
- 
S dt - kUCA, m2 cat. surf. - s 
Based on volume of 
1 dNA 
mol reacted 
catalyst pellets 
-rlkl= 
V, dt - P C A , [  m3 solid. s ] 
(17) 
Based on total reactor 
1 d
N
~
 mol reacted 
volume 
-rT= 
V, dt 
m3 reactor s 
Use whichever definition is convenient. However, for porous catalyst parti- 
cles rates based on unit mass and on unit volume of particles, r' and r"' are 
the useful measures. Hence for nth order reactions 
mol A 
(m3 gas)" 
r 
(kg cat). s ] = k l C y w h e r e k ' =  [(rnol A)"l (kg cat) - s 1 
(19) 
mol A 
(m3 gas)" 
-I; 
cat) . s] = k"'Cy where k" = (mol A)"-l (m3 cat) . s I 
4. In a manner similar to what was done for a single cylindrical pore, Thiele 


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 387 
(1939) and Aris (1957) related dwith MT for the various particle shapes as 
follows: 
- 1 
- - 
. tanh MT 
MT 
- 
- -. 1 
Il(2MT) 
MT 
z~(2MT) 
1 1 
1 
- 
- 
MT ' (tanh 3MT - %) 
where 
These relationships are shown in Fig. 18.6. If you know ge, k"', and L you can 
find the reaction rate from MT and Fig. 18.6. However, what if you want to 
evaluate k from an experiment in which you measure a rate which could have 
been slowed by diffusional resistance, but which you are unsure of? 
Thiele modulus: MT = ~dk"'19, 
Figure 18.6 Effectiveness factor versus MT for porous particles of various shapes. 


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
388 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
5. Finding pore resistance effects from experiment. Here we have a simple 
trick to help us. Define another modulus which only includes observable 
and measurable quantities. This is known as the Wagner-Weisz-Wheeler 
modulus Mw (lucky for us that the three researchers who first dealt with 
this problem had last names all starting with the same letter). 
We shall call this the Wagner modulus. 
6. Pore resistance limits. When reactant fully penetrates the particle and 
bathes all its surfaces, then the particle is in the diffusion free regime. This 
occurs when MT < 0.4 or Mw < 0.15. 
At the other extreme when the center of the particle is starved for reactant 
and is unused then the particle is in the strong pore resistance regime. This 
occurs when MT > 4 or Mw > 4. 
Figures 18.6 and 18.7 show these limits. 
7. Particles of Different Sizes. Comparing the behavior of particles of size R, 
and R2 we find in the diffusion-free regime 
In the regime of strong diffusion resistance 
Thus the rate varies inversely proportional to the particle size. 
M~ 
M~ 
Figure 18.7 Shows the limits for negligible and for strong pore diffusion resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 389 
Extensions 
There are many extensions to this basic treatment. Here we just mention a few. 
Mixture of Particles of Various Shapes and Sizes. For a catalyst bed consisting 
of a mixture of particles of various shapes and sizes Aris (1957) showed that the 
correct mean effectiveness factor is 
where f;, 
f ; ,  . . . are the volume fractions of particles of sizes 1, 2, . . . in 
the mixture. 
Molar Volume Change. With decrease in fluid density (expansion) during reac- 
tion the increased outflow of molecules from the pores makes it harder for 
reactants to diffuse into the pore, hence lowering d On the other hand, volumetric 
contraction results in a net molar flow into the pore, hence increasing k For a 
first-order reaction Thiele (1939) found that this flow simply shifted the d versus 
M ,  curve as shown in Fig. 18.5. 
Arbitrary Reaction Kinetics. If the Thiele modulus is generalized as follows 
[see Froment and Bischoff (1962)l 
then the &versus M ,  curves for all forms of rate equation closely follow the 
curve for the first-order reaction. This generalized modulus becomes 
for first-order reversible reactions 
for nth-order irreversible reactions 
nth-order reactions behave in an unexpected way in the region of strong pore 
resistance. Combining the nth-order rate with the generalized modulus of Eq. 


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
390 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
28 we obtain 
Thus, in the regime of strong pore diffusion, an nth-order reaction 
behaves like a reaction of order (n + 1)/2 or 
0 order becomes % order 
1st order remains 1st order 
2nd order becomes 1.5 order 
3rd order becomes 2nd order 
In addition the temperature dependency of reactions is affected by strong pore 
resistance. From Eq. 29 the observed rate constant for nth-order reactions is 
Taking logarithms and differentiating with respect to temperature and noting 
that both the reaction rate and to a lesser extent the diffusional process are 
temperature-dependent gives 
With Arrhenius temperature dependencies for both reaction and diffusion we 
have 
and replacing in Eq. 31 gives 
Since the activation energy for gas-phase reactions is normally rather high, say 
80 - 240 kJ, while that for diffusion is small (about 5 kJ at room temperature 
or 15 kJ at 1000"C), we can write approximately 
, 
Etrue 
E 
=- 
obs 
2 


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
18.4 Heat Effects during Reaction 391 
These results show that the observed activation energy for reactions influenced 
by strong pore resistance is approximately one-half the true activation energy. 
Summary-Diffusion Resistance in Pores 
For first-order surface reaction we summarize our finding in compact form in 
Eq. 34. 
this flat plate 
= 1 for no 
expression is a good 
rate without any 
diffusion 
approximation for all 
diffusion effects I;;/ 
resistance 
particle shapes 
tanhM, 
-ri 
= k c A s &  ... with ... 
&= --- 
MT 
effective diffusion 
coefficient in porous 
solids; m3 gaslm so1id.s 
~ ~ ( - r i ' , , d  
C~,obs 
g e  
&'= effectiveness factor, 
MT = Thiele modulus, 
Mw = Weisz modulus, 
a fudge factor 
useful for predicting 
useful for interpreting 
which varies betwen 0 
reactor behavior from 
experiments since it 
and 1, and which accounts 
known kinetic infor- 
only includes observables 
for the resistance to pore 
mation, thus known k '  
diffusion 
To find how pore resistance influences the rate evaluate MT or Mw, then find 
&from the above equations or figures, and insert &into the rate equation. 
Desirable processing range: Fine solids are free of pore diffusion resistance 
but are difficult to use (imagine the pressure drop of a packed bed of face 
powder). On the other hand a bed of large particles have a small Ap but are 
liable to be in the regime of strong pore diffusion where much of the pellets' 
interior is unused. 
For most effective operations what we want is to use the largest particle size 
which is still free of diffusional resistance or 
18.4 HEAT EFFECTS DURING REACTION 
When reaction is so fast that the heat released (or absorbed) in the pellet cannot 
be removed rapidly enough to keep the pellet close to the temperature of the 
fluid, then nonisothermal effects intrude. In such a situation two different kinds 
of temperature effects may be encountered: 
Within-particle AT. There may be a temperature variation within the pellet. 
Film AT. The pellet may be hotter (or colder) than the surrounding fluid. 


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
392 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
For exothermic reaction, heat is released and particles are hotter than the sur- 
rounding fluid, hence the nonisothermal rate is always higher than the isothermal 
rate as measured by the bulk stream conditions. However, for endothermic 
reactions the nonisothermal rate is lower than the isothermal rate because the 
particle is cooler than the surrounding fluid. 
Thus our first conclusion: if the harmful effects of thermal shock, or sintering 
of the catalyst surface, or drop in selectivity, do not occur with hot particles, 
then we would encourage nonisothermal behavior in exothermic reactions. On 
the other hand, we would like to depress such behavior for endothermic reactions. 
We next ask which form of nonisothermal effect, if any, may be present. The 
following simple calculations tell. 
ForJilm AT we equate the rate of heat removal through the film with the rate 
of heat generation by reaction within the pellet. Thus 
and on combining we find 
where L is the characteristic size of the pellet. 
For within-particle AT the simple analysis by Prater (1958) for any particle 
geometry and kinetics gives the desired expression. Since the temperature and 
concentration within the particle are represented by the same form of differential 
equation (Laplace equation) Prater showed that the T and CA distributions must 
have the same shape; thus at any point in the pellet x 
and for the pellet as a whole 
where ke, is the effective thermal conductivity within the pellet. 
For temperature gradients within particles the corresponding nonisothermal 
effective factor curves have been calculated by Carberry (1961), Weisz and Hicks 
(1962), and others [see Bischoff (1967) for references]. Figure 18.8 illustrates 
these curves in dimensionless form, and shows that the shape is very similar to 
the isothermal curve of Fig. 18.6 with the following exception. For exothermic 
reactions only, where pore resistance just begins to intrude, the effectiveness 
factor can become greater than unity. This finding is not unexpected in light of 
the above discussion. 


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
18.5 Performance Equations for Reactions Containing Porous Catalyst Particles 393 
10 
Generalized Thiele modulus of Eq. 26 
Figure 18.8 Nonisothermal effectiveness factor curve for temper- 
ature variation within the particle. Adapted from Bischoff (1967). 
However, for gas-solid systems Hutchings and Carberry (1966) and McGreavy 
and coworkers (1969, 1970) show that if reaction is fast enough to introduce 
nonisothermal effects, then the temperature gradient occurs primarily across the 
gas film, not within the particle. Thus we may expect to find a significant film 
AT, before any within-particle AT becomes evident. 
For detailed versions of Fig. 18.8 which show Bversus M ,  and 8 
versus Mw 
plus discussion and problems dealing with nonisothermal reactors, see Chapter 
22 in Levenspiel (1996). 
18.5 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR REACTORS CONTAINING 
POROUS CATALYST PARTICLES 
For Plug Flow. Take a thin slice of the PFR. Then following the analysis of 
Chapter 5 for homogeneous reactions we have the situation shown in Fig. 18.9. 
lj 
FA. 
In = FAO 
(1-XA. in) 9 
Volume of catalyst, AV, 
Moles A reactedls, 
Volume of catalyst, AV, 
Moles A reactedls, 
Figure 18.9 Elementary slice of solid catalyzed plug flow re- 
actor. 


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
394 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
At steady state a material balance for reactant A gives 
input = output + accumulation . . . - 
in symbols 
F
~
O
 - F
~
~
X
~
i
n
 
= F~~ - F ~ ~ X ~ o u t  
+ (-ra) AW 
In differential form 
FAo dXA = (-ra) dW = (-rz) dVs 
Integrating over the whole reactor gives 
Note the similarity of this equation with Eq. 5.13 for homogeneous reactions. 
To bring this analogy closer let 
We have no name,for these two measures but if we wanted to we could call 
them by the ugly terms weight-time, and volume-time, respectively. So for first- 
order catalytic reactions Eq. 41 becomes 
For Mixed Flow. Here we have, following the analysis of Chapter 5, for any 
EA value 
For first-order reactions with CAin = CAo, and E ,  Z 0 


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
18.5 Performance Equations for Reactions Containing Porous Catalyst Particles 395 
Gas and 
.
.
,
 
solids 
Solids 
Gas 
Gas 
Figure 18.10 Catalytic reactors where solid fraction f varies with 
height. 
For a Reactor Containing a Batch of Catalyst and a Batch of Gas 
Extensions of the Simple Performance Equations. There are numerous applica- 
tions of catalytic reactions where the fraction of solids f varies with height z in 
the reactor (see Fig. 18.10). 
For these situations the performance equations could more usefully be written 
differently. With uo as the superficial gas velocity (velocity if solids are absent) 
through the vertical reactor, Fig. 18.11 shows what happens in a thin slice through 
the reactor. A steady-state material balance gives 
Input of A = output of A + disappearance of A 
Cross-sectional 
FA out = ~ O A C A O  
(1-XA out) 
area, A 
Volume of solids in the 
lernent, fAAz [m3solidsl 
Reaction in the element 
-rrf AAz [molls] 
FA in = uOACAO (1-XA 
Figure 18.11 Section of catalytic reactor which has a solid frac- 
tion f. 


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
396 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
In symbols 
In differential form 
Integrating 
For first-order reactions this expression reduces to 
For the special case where E, = 0, f is constant, and the height of catalyst bed 
is H, we have 
The original derivation leading to Eqs. 40 to 47 is used in the next chapter on 
packed beds. The extension leading to Eqs. 48 to 51 is used in Chapter 20, when 
dealing with suspended solids reactors. 
18.6 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS FOR FINDING RATES 
Any type of reactor with known contacting pattern may be used to explore the 
kinetics of catalytic reactions. Since only one fluid phase is present in these 
reactions, the rates can be found as with homogeneous reactions. The only special 
precaution to observe is to make sure that the performance equation used is 
dimensionally correct and that its terms are carefully and precisely defined. 
The experimental strategy in studying catalytic kinetics usually involves mea- 
suring the extent of conversion of gas passing in steady flow through a batch of 
solids. Any flow pattern can be used, as long as the pattern selected is known; 
if it is not known then the kinetics cannot be found. A batch reactor can also 
be used. In turn we discuss the following experimental devices: 
Differential (flow) reactor 
Integral (plug flow) reactor 
Mixed flow reactor 
Batch reactor for both gas and solid 


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
18.6 
Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 397 
Differential Reactor. We have a differential flow reactor when we choose to 
consider the rate to be constant at all points within the reactor. Since rates are 
concentration-dependent this assumption is usually reasonable only for small 
conversions or for shallow small reactors. But this is not necessarily so, e.g., for 
slow reactions where the reactor can be large, or for zero-order kinetics where 
the composition change can be large. 
For each run in a differential reactor the plug flow performance equation be- 
comes 
from which the average rate for each run is found. Thus each run gives directly 
a value for the rate at the average concentration in the reactor, and a series of 
runs gives a set of rate-concentration data which can then be analyzed for a 
rate equation. 
Example 18.2 illustrates the suggested procedure. 
Integral Reactor. When the variation in reaction rate within a reactor is so 
large that we choose to account for these variations in the method of analysis, 
then we have an integral reactor. Since rates are concentration-dependent, such 
large variations in rate may be expected to occur when the composition of 
reactant fluid changes significantly in passing through the reactor. We may follow 
one of two procedures in searching for a rate equation. 
Integral Analysis. Here a specific mechanism with its corresponding rate equa- 
tion is put to the test by integrating the basic performance equation to give, 
similar to Eq. 5.17, 
Equations 5.20 and 5.23 are the integrated forms of Eq. 5.17 for simple kinetic 
equations, and Example 1 8 . 3 ~  
illustrates this procedure. 
Differential Analysis. Integral analysis provides a straightforward rapid proce- 
dure for testing some of the simpler rate expressions. However, the integrated 
forms of these expressions become unwieldy with more complicated rate expres- 
sions. In these situations, the differential method of analysis becomes more 
convenient. The procedure is closely analogous to the differential method de- 
scribed in Chapter 3. So, by differentiating Eq. 53 we obtain 
Example 18.3b illustrates this procedure. 


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
398 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Inverted cup 
Four rapidly spinning 
wire baskets containing 
catalyst pellets, W 
F ~ O v  X ~ i n r  C ~ i n  
Spinning 
shaft 
Figure 18.12 Sketch of a Carberry basket-type experimental mixed 
flow reactor. 
Mixed Flow Reactor. A mixed flow reactor requires a uniform composition of 
fluid throughout, and although it may seem difficult at first thought to approach 
this ideal with gas-solid systems (except for differential contacting), such con- 
tacting is in fact practical. One simple experimental device which closely ap- 
proaches this ideal has been devised by Carberry (1964). It is called the basket- 
type mixed pow reactor, and it is illustrated in Fig. 18.12. References to design 
variations and uses of basket reactors are given by Carberry (1969). Another 
device for approaching mixed flow is the design developed by Berty (1974), and 
illustrated in Fig. 18.13. Still another design is that of a recycle reactor with 
R = m. This is considered in the next section. 
For the mixed flow reactor the performance equation becomes 
Feed 
Spinning 
shaft 
Figure 18.13 Principle of the Berty experimen- 
tal mixed flow reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
18.6 Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 399 
from which the rate is 
Thus each run gives directly a value for the rate at the composition of the exit fluid. 
Examples 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 and 18.6 show how to treat such data. 
Recycle Reactor. As with integral analysis of an integral reactor, when we use 
a recycle reactor we must put a specific kinetic equation to the test. The procedure 
requires inserting the kinetic equation into the performance equation for recy- 
cle reactors 
and integrating. Then a plot of the left- versus right-hand side of the equation 
tests for linearity. Figure 18.14 sketches an experimental recycle reactor. 
Unfortunately such data would be difficult to interpret when done using a low 
or intermediate recycle ratio. So we ignore this regime. But with a large enough 
recycle ratio mixed flow is approached, in which case the methods of the mixed 
flow reactor (direct evaluation of rate from each run) can be used. Thus a high 
recycle ratio provides a way of approximating mixed flow with what is essentially 
a plug flow device. But be warned, the problems of deciding how large a recycle 
ratio is large enough can be serious. Wedel and Villadsen (1983) and Broucek 
(1983) discuss the limitation of this reactor. 
F I U ~  
in, 
XAi" = 0 
Figure 18.14 Experimental recycle re- 
actor. When the recycle ratio is large 
enough mixed flow is closely approxi- 
mated. 


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
400 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Follow change 
of composition 
with time 
Catalyst W 
Small composition 
change across 
reactor 
Figure 18.15 Batch reactor (batch of catalyst and batch of fluid) for cata- 
lytic reactions. 
Batch Reactor. Figure 18.15 sketches the main features of an experimental 
reactor which uses a batch of catalyst and a batch of fluid. In this system we 
follow the changing composition with time and interpret the results with the 
batch reactor performance equation. 
The procedure is analogous with the homogeneous batch reactor. To ensure 
meaningful results, the composition of fluid must be uniform throughout the 
system at any instant. This requires that the conversion per pass across the 
catalyst be small. 
A recycle reactor without through-flow becomes a batch reactor. This type of 
batch reactor was used by Butt et al. (1962). 
Comparison of Experimental Reactors 
1. The integral reactor can have significant temperature variations from point 
to point, especially with gas-solid systems, even with cooling at the walls. 
This could well make kinetic measurements from such a reactor completely 
worthless when searching for rate expressions. The basket reactor is best 
in this respect. 
2. The integral reactor is useful for modeling the operations of larger packed 
bed units with all their heat and mass transfer effects, particularly for systems 
where the feed and product consist of a variety of materials. 
3. Since the differential and mixed flow reactors give the rate directly they 
are more useful in analyzing complex reacting systems. The test for anything 
but a simple kinetic form can become awkward and impractical with the 
integral reactor. 
4. The small conversions needed in differential reactors require more accurate 
measurements of composition than the other reactor types. 
5. The recycle reactor with large recycle acts as a mixed flow reactor and 
shares its advantages. Actually, to minimize heat effects the catalyst need 
not be all at one location, but can be distributed throughout the recycle loop. 


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
18.6 Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 401 
6. In exploring the physical factors of heat and mass transfer, the integral 
reactor most closely models the larger fixed bed; however, the basket, 
recycle, and batch GIS reactors are more suited for finding the limits for 
such heat effects, for avoiding the regime where these effects intrude, and 
for studying the kinetics of the reaction unhindered by these phenomena. 
7. The batch GIS reactor, like the integral reactor, gives cumulative effects, 
thus is useful for following the progress of multiple reactions. In these 
reactors it is easier to study reactions free from heat and mass transfer 
resistances (simply increase the circulation rate), and it is also simple to 
slow down the progress of reactions (use a larger batch of fluid, or less 
catalyst); however, direct modeling of the packed bed with all its complexi- 
ties is best done with the integral flow reactor. 
8. Because of the ease in interpreting its results the mixed flow reactor is 
probably the most attractive device for studying the kinetics of solid cata- 
lyzed reactions. 
Determining Controlling Resistances and the Rate Equation 
Interpretation of experiments becomes difficult when more than one resistance 
affects the rate. To avoid this problem we should like, with preliminary runs, to 
first find the limits of operations where the various resistances become important. 
This will allow us to select conditions of operations in which the resistances can 
be studied separately. 
Film Resistance. First of all, it is best to see whether film resistance of any 
kind (for mass or heat transfer) need be considered. This can be done in a 
number of ways. 
1. Experiments can be devised to see whether the conversion changes at 
different gas velocities but at identical weight-time. This is done by using 
different amounts of catalyst in integral or differential reactors for identical 
values for weight-time, by changing the spinning rate in basket reactors, or 
by changing the circulation rate in recycle or batch reactors. 
2. If data are available we can calculate whether film resistance to heat transfer 
is important by the estimate of Eq. 36., and whether film resistance to mass 
transport is important by comparing the observed first-order rate constant 
based on the volume of particle with the mass transfer coefficient for that 
type of flow. 
For fluid moving past a single particle at relative velocity u Froessling 
(1938) gives 
while for fluid passing through a packed bed of particles Ranz (1952) gives 


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
402 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Thus we have roughly 
1 
kg - - 
for small dp and u 
dP 
u112 
kg - - for large d, and u 
dki2 
Thus to see whether film mass transfer resistance is important compare 
k rb,Vp versus kg&, 
(58) 
If the two terms are of the same order of magnitude we may suspect that the 
gas film resistance affects the rate. On the other hand, if k,,,V, is much smaller 
than kg$,, we may ignore the resistance to mass transport through the film. 
Example 18.1 illustrate this type of calculation. The results of that example 
confirm our earlier statement that film mass transfer resistance is unlikely to 
play a role with porous catalyst. 
Nonisothermal Effects. We may expect temperature gradients to occur either 
across the gas film or within the particle. However, the previous discussion 
indicates that for gas-solid systems the most likely effect to intrude on the rate 
will be the temperature gradient across the gas film. Consequently, if experiment 
shows that gas film resistance is absent then we may expect the particle to be 
at the temperature of its surrounding fluid; hence, isothermal conditions may be 
assumed to prevail. Again see Example 18.1. 
Pore Resistance. The effectiveness factor accounts for this resistance. Thus, 
based on unit mass of catalyst we have 
where 
The existence of pore resistance can be determined by 
1. Calculation if CZJe is known. 
2. Comparing rates for different pellet sizes. 
3. Noting the drop in activation energy of the reaction with rise in temperature, 
coupled with a possible change in reaction order. 
18.7 PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION IN MULTIPLE REACTIONS 
More often than not, solid-catalyzed reactions are multiple reactions. Of the 
variety of products formed, usually only one is desired, and it is the yield of this 
material which is to be maximized. In cases such as these the question of product 
distribution is of primary importance. 
Here we examine how strong pore diffusion modifies the true instantaneous 
fractional yield for various types of reactions; however, we leave to Chapter 7 


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 403 
the calculation of the overall fractional yield in reactors with their particular 
flow patterns of fluid. In addition, we will not consider film resistance to mass 
transfer since this effect is unlikely to influence the rate. 
Decomposition of a Single Reactant by Two Paths 
N o  resistance to pore diffusion. Consider the parallel-path decomposition 
R (desired), 
r~ = klC2 
f 
A, \ S (unwanted), 
rs = k2Ci2 
Here the instantaneous fractional yield at any element of catalyst surface is 
given by 
or for first-order reactions 
1 
= 1 + (k21kl) 
Strong resistance to pore diffusion. Under these conditions we have 
and with Eq. 29 
4 g e  
(a, + a, + 2)(k1 + k2)C2i1 
Using a similar expression for r, and replacing both of these into the defining 
equation for cp gives 
- r~ - 
- 
1 
PO~S 
- - 
r + r - 1 + (k21k,)Cg-al)" 
and for equal-order or for first-order reactions 
This result is expected since the rules in Chapter 7 suggest that the product 
distribution for competing reactions of same order should be unaffected by 
changing concentration of A in the pores or in the reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
404 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Reactions in Series 
As characteristic of reactions in which the desired product can decompose further, 
consider the successive first-order decompositions 
When CA does not drop in the interior of catalyst particles, true rates are ob- 
served. thus 
- 
(~obs -  true 
or 
(5) = (5) 
kl obs 
kl true 
Strong resistance to pore diffusion. An analysis similar to that starting with 
Eq. 2 using the appropriate kinetic rate expressions gives the concentration ratio 
of materials in the main gas stream (or pore mouths) at any point in the reactor. 
Thus the differential expression (see Wheeler, 1951 for details) is 
For mixed flow with CA going from CAo to CA, Eq. 65 with CRo = 0 gives 
For plug flow, integration with CRo = 0 gives 
Comparing Eqs. 66 and 67 with the corresponding expressions for no resistance 
in pores, Eqs. 8.41 and 8.37, shows that here the distributions of A and R are 
given by a reaction having the square root of the true k ratio, with the added 
modification that CRg is divided by 1 + y. The maximum yield of R is likewise 
affected. Thus for plug flow Eq. 8.8 or 8.38 is modified to give 
and for mixed flow Eq. 8.15 or 8.41 is modified to give 
Table 18.2 shows that the yield of R is about halved in the presence of strong 
resistance to diffusion in the pores. 


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 405 
Table 18.2 The Role of Diffusion in Pores for First-Order Reactions in Series 
CRg,,,,/CAo for Plug Flow 
CRg,,,ICAo for Mixed Flow 
No 
Strong 
Percent 
No 
Strong 
Percent 
k,/k, 
Resistance 
Resistance 
Decrease 
Resistance 
Resistance 
Decrease 
1 164 
0.936 
0.650 
30.6 
0.790 
0.486 
38.5 
1/16 
0.831 
0.504 
39.3 
0.640 
0.356 
44.5 
1 I4 
0.630 
0.333 
47.6 
0.444 
0.229 
48.5 
1 
0.368 
0.184 
50.0 
0.250 
0.125 
50.0 
4 
0.157 
0.083 
47.2 
0.111 
0.057 
48.5 
16 
0.051 
0.031 
38.2 
0.040 
0.022 
44.5 
For more on the whole subject of the shift in product distribution caused by 
diffusional effects, see Wheeler (1951). 
Extensions to Real Catalysts 
So far we have considered catalyst pellets having only one size of pore. Real 
catalysts, however, have pores of various sizes. A good example of this are the 
pellets prepared by compressing a porous powder. Here there are large openings 
between the agglomerated particles and small pores within each particle. As a 
first approximation we may represent this structure by two pore sizes as shown 
in Fig. 18.16. If we define the degree of branching of a porous structure by a where 
a = 0 represents a nonporous particle 
a = 1 represents a particle with one size of pore 
a = 2 represents a particle with two pore sizes 
then every real porous pellet can be characterized by some value of a. 
Model of pore structure 
porous powder 
Figure 18.16 Porous structure with two sizes of pores as a model for a pellet of compressed 
porous powder. 


=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
406 
Chapter I8 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Now for strong pore diffusion in one size of pore we already know that the 
observed order of reaction, activation energy, and k ratio for multiple reactions 
will differ from the true value. Thus from Eqs. 30 and 32 
1 
1 
Eobs = - Ediff + - E 
2 
2 
n  - 1 
2 
(5) = (?)In 
. - - for side-by-side reactions 
kl obs 
Carberry (1962a, b), Tartarelli (1968), and others have extended this type of 
analysis to other values of a and to reversible reactions. Thus for two sizes of 
pores, where reaction occurs primarily in the smaller pores (because of much 
more area there), while both sizes of pores offer strong pore diffusional resistance, 
we find 
n - 1  
4 
- - . for side-by-side reactions 
More generally for an arbitrary porous structure 
[(2),, 
= (2)'l2' 
- 
for side-by-side reactions 
These findings show that for large a, diffusion plays an increasingly important 
role, in that the observed activation energy decreases to that of diffusion, and the 
reaction order approaches unity. So, for a given porous structure with unknown a, 
the only reliable estimate of the true k ratio would be from experiments under 
conditions where pore diffusion is unimportant. On the other hand, finding the 
experimental ratio of k values under both strong and negligible pore resistance 
should yield the value of a. This in turn should shed light on the pore structure 
geometry of the catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 407 
SEARCH OF THE RATE-CONTROLLING MECHANISM 
An experimental rate measurement on the decomposition of A is made with a 
particular catalyst (see pertinent data listed below). 
(a) Is it likely that film resistance to mass transfer influences the rate? 
(b) Could this run have been made in the regime of strong pore diffusion? 
(c) Would you expect to have temperature variations within the pellet or 
across the gas film? 
Data 
For the spherical particle: 
dp = 2.4mmorL = R/3 =0.4mm = 4 X  10-4mcat 
C2Je = 5 x 
m3/hr. m cat (effective mass conductivity) 
k,, = 1.6 kJ/hr. m cat - K (effective thermal conductivity) 
For the gas film surrounding the pellet (from correlations in the literature): 
h = 160 kJ/hr. m2 cat K (heat transfer coefficient) 
kg = 300 m3/hr. m2 cat (mass transfer coefficient) 
I 
For the reaction: 
AH, = -160 kJ/mol A (exothermic) 
CAg = 20 mol/m3 (at 1 atm and 336°C) 
-rT,obs = lo5 mollhr . m3 cat 
Assume that the reaction is first order. 
I SOLUTION 
(a) Film mass transfer. From Eq. 58, and introducing numerical values, we 
obtain 
observed rate 
kr'r V 
(-r'rr 
- obs p - 
A, obs/C~g)(nd;/6) - 
-- -YZ, 
obs . dp 
rate if film resistance controls 
kg&, 
kg(ndi) 
c~gkg 6 
- 
- 
lo5 mol/hr. m3 cat 
2.4 X 
m cat 
(20 mol/m3)(300 m3/hr. m2 cat) ' 
6 
I 
The observed rate is very much lower than the limiting film mass transfer rate. 


=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
408 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Thus the resistance to film mass transfer certainly should not influence the 
rate of reaction. 
(b) Strong pore diffusion. Equations 24 and Fig. 18.7 test for strong pore 
diffusion. Thus 
This quantity Mw is greater than 4, hence pore diffusion is influencing and 
slowing the rate of reaction. 
(c) Nonisothermaloperations. The estimate for the upper limit to temperature 
variations is given by Eqs. 38 and 36. Thus within the pellet 
- 
- (5 X 
m3/hr. m cat)(20 mol/m3)(160 kJ/mol) 
(1.6 kJ/hr. m cat. K) 
Across the gas film 
These estimates show that the pellet is close to uniform in temperature, but 
could well be hotter than the surrounding fluid. 
The findings of this example use coefficients close to those observed in real 
gas-solid systems (see the appendix), and the conclusions verify the discussion 
of this chapter. 
THE RATE EQUATION FROM A DIFFERENTIAL REACTOR 
The catalytic reaction 
is run at 3.2 atm and 117°C in a plug flow reactor which contains 0.01 kg of 
catalyst and uses a feed consisting of the partially converted product of 20 liters/ 
hr of pure unreacted A. The results are as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 409 
and 
Run 
1 
2 
3 
4 
CAin , mollliter 
CA ,, mollliter 
0.100 
0.080 
0.060 
0.040 
0.084 
0.070 
0.055 
0.038 
Find a rate equation to represent this reaction. 
SOLUTION 
Since the maximum variation about the mean concentration is 8% (run I), we 
may consider this to be a differential reactor and we may apply Eq. 52 to find 
the reaction rate. 
Basing conversion for all runs on pure A at 3.2 atm and 117"C, we have 
c - N~~ -PAO - 
3.2 atm 
mol 
AO- v 
= 0.1 - 
RT (0.082 liter atmlmol . K)(390 K) 
liter 
F - C  
molA 
liters 
mol 
Ao- 
Aov=(~-lter)(2~lr)=2G 
Because the density changes during reaction, concentrations and conversions are 
related by 
CA - 1 - X A  
-- 
1 - CAICAo 
or 
X, = 
CAO 1 + EAXA 
1 + EA(CAICAO) 
where EA = 3 for the basis selected (pure A). 
Table E18.2 shows the details of the calculations. Plotting - r i  versus CA as 
shown in Fig. E18.2 gives a straight line through the origin, indicating a first- 
Table E18.2 
X ~ i n  = 
x ~ o u t  = 
C ~ i n  
I-- 
C ~ o u t  
I-- 
c~~ 
c~~ 
C ~ i n  
C ~ o u t  
- - c ~ a v  
1 + e A p  
C ~ i n  
c ~ o u t  
A x A  = 
-r6 = - 
 ax^ 
CAO 
CA, 
mollliter 
CAO 
X
~
~
~
t
 
- X ~ i n  
WIFAO 
1 
1-1- 
1 - 0.84 
0.0455 
0.0455 9.1 
0.84 
0.092 
i--qj - 
= 0.0455 
-= 
O 
1 + 3(0.84) 
0.0112 
0.8 
0.70 
0.075 
0.0588 
0.0968 
0.0380 
7.6 
0.6 
0.55 
0.0575 
0.1429 
0.1698 
0.0269 
5.4 
0.4 
0.38 
0.039 
0.2727 
0.2897 
0.0171 
3.4 


=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
410 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
rnol 
CA, liter 
Figure E18.2 
order decomposition. The rate in terms of moles A reactedlhrekg cat is then 
found from this figure to be 
1 dNA 
liters )( 
m"l) 
= 
W dt 
hr.kgcat '*E 
THE RATE EQUATION FROM AN INTEGRAL REACTOR 
The catalytic reaction 
is studied in a plug flow reactor using various amounts of catalyst and 20 liters1 
hr of pure A feed at 3.2 atm and 117°C. The concentrations of A in the effluent 
stream is recorded for the various runs as follows. 
(a) Find the rate equation for this reaction, using the integral method of 
analysis 
(b) Repeat part (a), using the differential method of analysis. 
Run 
Catalyst used, kg 
CAout, mollliter 
1 
2 
3 
4 
0.020 
0.040 
0.080 
0.160 
0.074 
0.060 
0.044 
0.029 


=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 411 
I SOLUTION 
(a) Integral Analysis. From Example 18.2 we have for all experimental runs 
Since the concentration varies significantly during the runs, the experimental 
reactor should be considered to be an integral reactor. 
As a first guess try a first-order rate expression. Then for plug flow Eq. 
44 gives 
c ~ ~ w  
1 
kt - 
= (1 + 
In- 
- &AXA 
FAO 
1 - XA 
and with cA, CAO, and FAo replaced by numerical values this becomes 
The two terms in parentheses should be proportional to each other with kt as 
the constant of proportionality. Evaluating these terms in Table E18.3a for 
Table E18.3a Calculations Needed to Test the Fit of Eq. (i); Integral Analysis 
the data points and plotting as in Fig. 18.3a, we see that there is no reason to 
suspect that we do not have a linear relationship. Hence we may conclude 
that the first-order rate equation satisfactorily fits the data. With kt evaluated 
from Fig. 18.3a, we then have 
liters 
= (95 hr.kgcat)(cA'm) 
(b) Differential Analysis. Equation 54 shows that the rate of reaction is given 
by the slope of the XA versus WIFAo curve. The tabulation (Table E18.3b) 
based on the measured slopes in Fig. E18.3b shows how the rate of reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
412 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
CAOW 
w 
hr . kg cat 
- 
FAO - 20 ' 
liter 
Figure E18.3a 
Figure E18.3b 


=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 413 
I 
Table E18.3b Calculations Used for the Differential Analysis 
(from Fig. E18.3b) 
unused 
5.62 
4.13 
2.715 
rnol 
CA, - 
liter 
Figure E18.3~ 
is found at various C,. The linear relation between - r i  and CA in Fig. 
E18.3~ then gives for the rate equation: 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR SIZE FROM A RATE EQUATION 
Consider the catalytic reaction of Example 18.2. Using the rate equation found 
for this reaction determine the amount of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor 
(assume plug flow) for 35% conversion of A to R for a feed of 2000 mollhr of 
pure A at 3.2 atm and 117°C. 


=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
414 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
/ SOLUTION 
The amount of catalyst needed is given by the first-order rate expression for 
1 
plug flow, Eq. 44. Thus 
Replacing all the known values from Example 18.2 into this expression gives the 
final result, or 
mol A 
2000 - 
hr 
= ( 
liter )( md;) 
96 hr . kg cat 
0.1 - 
= 140 kg catalyst 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR SIZE FROM RATE 
CONCENTRATION DATA 
For the reaction of Example 18.2 suppose the following rate concentration data 
are available: 
CA , mollliter 
0.039 
0.0575 
0.075 
0.092 
- r i ,  mol Alhr . kg cat 
3.4 
5.4 
7.6 
9.1 
Directly from this data, and without using a rate equation, find the size of packed 
bed needed to treat 2000 mollhr of pure A at 117°C (or C,, 
= 0.1 mollliter, 
EA = 3) to 35% conversion, all at 3.2 atm. 
Note: Rate information such as this can be obtained from a differential reactor 
(see Table E18.2), or from other types of experimental reactors. 
SOLUTION 
To find the amount of catalyst needed without using an analytic expression for 
the rate concentration relationship requires graphical integration of the plug 
flow performance equation, or 
I 


=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 415 
Table E18.5 
- r6, 
1 - 
1 - CA/O.l 
X - 
(given) 
(given) 
A - 1 + 3CA/0.1 
The needed 11-ra versus X, data are determined in Table E18.5 and are plotted 
in Fig. E18.5. Integrating graphically then gives 
Hence 
hr - kg cat 
W = (2000 F) 
(0.0735 mol A 
- 
- 
= 147 kg cat 
"0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 0.35 
0.4 
XA, 
dimensionless 
Figure E18.5 


=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
416 
Chapter I8 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
i 4 P  
* * I ,  i 
, t *  s h  a =  
.- 
MIXED FLOW REACTOR SIZE 
For the reaction of Example 18.2 determine the amount of catalyst needed in a 
packed bed reactor with a very large recycle rate (assume mixed flow) for 35% 
conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 2000 mollhr of pure A at 3.2 atm and 
117°C. For the reaction at this temperature 
A +4R, 
- r i  = 96 C,, 
mollkg cat. hr 
From Example 18.2, CAo = 0.1 mollliter and E, = 3. 
SOLUTION 
At 35% conversion the concentration of reactant is 
1 - X, 
1 - 0.35 
= 'AO ( 1 + cAXA ) = 
+ 3(0.35)) = 0'0317 
Now for mixed flow Eq. 45 gives 
W - x
~
~
~
t
 
- 
x
~
l
~
 
- x ~ o u t  - x~~~ 
-- 
- 
F~~ 
- r iout 
Id C ~ ~ u t  
W = 2000 ( 0'35 - ) = 230 kg 
- 
96(0.0317) = 
Note: A mixed flow reactor requires more catalyst than does a plug flow reactor, 
as expected. 
1 EXAMPLE 18.7 
MASS TRANSFER RESISTANCES 
What is the most reasonable interpretation, in terms of controling resistances, 
of the kinetic data of Table E18.7 obtained in a basket type mixed flow reactor 
if we know that the catalyst is porous? Assume isothermal behavior. 
Table E18.7 
Leaving 
Spinning 
Measured 
Pellet 
Concentration 
Rate of 
Reaction 
Diameter 
of Reactant 
Baskets 
Rate, -rA 
1 
1 
high 
3 
3 
1 
low 
1 
3 
1 
high 
1 


=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
References 417 
Let us see whether film resistance or pore resistance could be slowing the rate 
of reaction. 
Runs 2 and 3 use different spinning rates but have the same reaction rate. 
Therefore film diffusion is ruled out for the larger pellets. But Eq. 57 shows that 
if film resistance is not important for large pellets it will not be important for 
small pellets. Therefore film resistance does not influence the rate. 
Next, comparing run 1 and either run 2 or 3 shows that 
Eq. 25 then tells us that we are in the regime of strong pore resistance. Thus 
our final conclusion is 
negligible film resistance 
strong pore diffusion resistance 
REFERENCES 
Aris, R., Chem. Eng. Sci., 6, 262 (1957). 
Berty, J., Chem. Eng. Prog., 70 (S), 78 (1974). 
Bischoff, K. B., Chem. Eng. Sci., 22, 525 (1967). 
Boudart, M., AIChE J., 2, 62 (1956). 
Broucek, R., Chem. Eng. Sci., 38, 1349 (1983). 
Butt, J. B., Bliss, H., and Walker, C. A., AIChE J., 8, 42 (1962). 
Carberry, J. J., AIChE J., 7, 350 (1961). 
, 
AIChE J., 8, 557 (1962a). 
, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 17,675 (1926b). 
, 
Ind. Eng. Chem., 56, 39 (Nov. 1964). 
, 
Catalysis Reviews, 3, 61 (1969). 
Chou, C. H., Znd. Eng. Chem., 50,799 (1958). 
Corrigan, T. E., Chem. Eng., 61,236 (November 1954); 61,198 (December 1954); 62,199 
(January 1955); 62,195 (February 1955); 62, 203 (May 1955); 62,227 (July 1955). 
Froessling, N., Gerland Beitr. Geophys., 52, 170 (1938). 
Froment, G. F., and Bischoff, K. B., Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, p. 162, John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1990. 
Hougen, 0. A., and Watson, K. M., Chemical Process Principles, Part 111, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1947. 
Hutchings, J., and Carberry, J. J., AIChE J., 12, 20 (1966). 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Chap. 22, OSU Bookstore, Corvallis, 
OR, 1996. 
McGreavy, C., and Cresswell, D. L., Can. J. Ch.E., 47, 583 (1969a). 
, 
a
n
d
,
 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 24,608 (1969b). 
McGreavy, C., and Thornton, J. M., Can. J. Ch. E., 48, 187 (1970a). 
, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 25,303 (1970b). 
Prater, C. C., Chem. Eng. Sci., 8, 284 (1958). 
, 
and Lago, R. M., Advances in Catalysis, 8, 293 (1956). 


=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
418 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Ranz, W. E., Chem. Eng. Prog., 48,247 (1952). 
Satterfield, C. N., Mass Transfer in Heterogeneous Catalysis, M.I.T. Press, 1970. 
Tartarelli, R., Chim. Ind. (Milan), 50, 556 (1968). 
Thiele, E. W., Znd. Eng. Chem., 31, 916 (1939). 
Walas, S., Reaction Kinetics for Chemical Engineers, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959. 
Wedel, S., and Villadsen, J., Chem. Eng. Sci., 38, 1346 (1983). 
Weisz, P. B., Chem. Eng. Prog. Symp. Series, No. 25, 55, 29 (1959). 
, 
and Hicks, J. S., Chem. Eng. Sci., 17, 265 (1962). 
Weller, S., AIChE J., 2, 59 (1956). 
Wheeler, A., Advances in Catalysis, 3, 250 (1951). 
PROBLEMS 
These problems are loosely grouped as follows: 
Problems 1-19: Direct application of performance equations. These problems 
should be tried first. 
Problems 20-30: Pore diffusion kinetics. 
Problems 31-40: Reactor size + pore diffusion 
18.1. While being shown around Lumphead Laboratories, you stop to view a 
reactor used to obtain kinetic data. It consists of a 5-cm ID glass column 
packed with a 30-cm height of active catalyst. Is this a differential or 
integral reactor? 
18.2. A solid catalyzed first-order reaction, E = 0, takes place with 50% conver- 
sion in a basket type mixed reactor. What will be the conversion if the 
reactor size is trebled and all else-temperature, 
amount of catalyst, feed 
composition, and flow rate-remains 
unchanged? 
18.3. The following kinetic data on the reaction A -+ R are obtained in an 
experimental packed bed reactor using various amounts of catalyst and 
a fixed feed rate FA, = 10 kmollhr. 
(a) Find the reaction rate at 40% conversion. 
(b) In designing a large packed bed reactor with feed rate FA, = 400 
kmollhr how much catalyst would be needed for 40% conversion. 
(c) How much catalyst would be needed in part (b) if the reactor em- 
ployed a very large recycle of product stream. 
A gas containing A (2 mol/m3) is fed (1 m3/hr) to a plug flow reactor 
with recycle loop (0.02 m3 loop volume, 3 kg of catalyst), and the output 
composition from the reactor system is measured (0.5 mol A/m3). Find 
the rate equation for the decomposition of A for the following cases. Be 
sure to give the units of -ra, C,, 
and k' in your final expression. 


=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
Problems 419 
18.4. Very large recycle, A - 
R, n = 112 
18.5. Very large recycle, A -+ 3R, n = 1, 50% A-50% inerts in feed 
18.6. No recycle, A -+ 3R, n = 2, 25% A-75% inerts in feed 
Gaseous A reacts (A -t R) in an experimental reactor. From the following 
conversion data at various conditions find a rate equation to represent 
the reaction 
18.8. 
W, gm 
0.5 
1.0 2.5 
Plug flow 
CA, = 60 mol/m3 
CA 
30 
20 
10 
u = 3 literlmin 
u,, m3/hr 
XA 
The following kinetic data are obtained in an experimental Carberry type 
basket reactor using 100 gm of catalyst in the paddles and different flow 
rates from run to run: 
3 
2 
1.2 Mixed flow 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
0.2 
0.3 
0.5 
W = 4 gm 
A-R 
FAo,mol/min 
0.14 
0.42 
1.67 2.5 
1.25 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
CA, mol/m3 
8
6
4
2
1
 
18.9. Determine the amount of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor for 
75% conversion of 1000 mol Almin of a CAo = 8 mol/m3 feed. 
18.10. Find W for mixed flow, XA = 0.90, CAo = 10 mol/m3, FAo = 1000 mollmin. 
How much catalyst is needed in a packed bed reactor for 80% conversion 
of 1000 m3/hr of pure gaseous A (CAo = 100 mol/m3) if the stoichiometry 
and rate are given by 
A+R, -,a 
= 
50CA 
mol 
1 + 0.02CA kg. hr 
mol 
A-R, 
- r i  = 8 C i  - 
kg. hr 
18.13. Gaseous feed with A and B (u, = 10 m3/hr) pass through an experimental 
reactor packed with catalyst (W = 4 kg). Reaction occurs as follows: 
mol 
A + B + R + S ,  
-,A=o.~c c - 
A Bkg.hr 


=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
420 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Find the conversion of reactants if the feed contains CAo = 0.1 mol/m3 
and C, = 10 mol/m3. 
18.14. A West Texas gas oil is cracked in a tubular reactor packed with silica- 
alumina cracking catalyst. The liquid feed (mw = 0.255) is vaporized, 
heated, enters the reactor at 630°C and 1 atm, and with adequate tempera- 
ture control stays close to this temperature within the reactor. The cracking 
reaction follows first-order kinetics and gives a variety of products with 
mean molecular weight mw = 0.070. Half the feed is cracked for a feed 
rate of 60 m3 liquid/m3 reactor. hr. In the industry this measure of feed 
rate is called the liquid hourly space velocity. Thus LHSV = 60 hr-l. Find 
the first-order rate constants k' and kt" for this cracking reaction. 
Data: Density of liquid feed: p, = 869 kg/m3 
Bulk density of packed bed: p, = 700 kg/m3 
Density of catalyst particles: p, = 950 kg/m3 
This problem is prepared from Satterfield (1970). 
18.15. Kinetic experiments on the solid catalyzed reaction A -3R are conducted 
at 8 atm and 700°C in a basket type mixed reactor 960 cm3 in volume and 
containing 1 gm of catalyst of diameter d, = 3 mm. Feed consisting of 
pure A is introduced at various rates into the reactor and the partial 
pressure of A in the exit stream is measured for each feed rate. The results 
are as follows: 
Feed rate, literslhr 
100 
22 
4 
1 
0.6 
P Aoutlp Ain 
1 
0.8 
0.5 
0.2 
0.1 
0.05 
Find a rate equation to represent the rate of reaction on catalyst of this size. 
18.16. "El jefe" (the chief) decided to do something to improve the low conver- 
sion (XA = 0.80) of our first-order solid-catalyzed liquid-phase reaction. 
Instead of ordering more of the expensive catalyst to fill the half-empty 
reactor, he decided to save money by adding some tricky piping to the 
present vertical packed bed reactor. When I saw what the mechanics were 
putting together for him, (see Fig. P18.16), I told "el jefe" that it didn't 
seem right. I could sense right away that my saying this annoyed him, but 
all he said was, "All right, young lady. Why don't you tell me what 
conversion to expect with this arrangement?" Please do this. 
ug flow 
c,, 
= 100 
u, = 100 
Figure P18.16 


=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Problems 421 
18.17. The second-order reaction A -+ R is studied in a recycle reactor with 
very large recycle ratio, and the following data are recorded: 
Void volume of reactor: 1 liter 
Weight of catalyst used: 3 gm 
Feed to the reactor: 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
u0 = 1 literlhr 
Exit stream condition: CAOut 
= 0.5 mollliter 
(a) Find the rate constant for this reaction (give units). 
(b) How much catalyst is needed in a packed bed reactor for 80% conver- 
sion of 1000 literlhr of feed of concentration CAo = 1 mollliter. No re- 
cycle. 
(c) Repeat part (b) if the reactor is packed with 1 part catalyst to 4 parts 
inert solid. This addition of inerts helps maintain isothermal conditions 
and reduce possible hot spots. 
Note: Assume isothermal conditions throughout. 
18.18. A small experimental packed bed reactor (W = 1 kg) using very large 
recycle of product stream gives the following kinetic data: 
A+R, 
CA,mol/m3 1 
2 
3 
6 
9 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
v,, literlhr 
5 
20 
65 
133 540 
Find the amount of catalyst needed for 75% conversion for a flow rate of 
1000 mol A/hr of a CA, = 8 mol/m3 feed stream 
(a) in a packed bed reactor with no recycle of exit fluid 
(b) in a packed bed reactor with very high recycle 
18.19. A closed loop batch GIs reactor (see Fig. P18.19) is used for catalytic 
rate studies. For this purpose feed gas with reactant is introduced into 
the system and is rapidly circulated through the catalyst loop. From the 
following composition-time data find a kinetic equation in units of moll 
gm - min to represent this reaction. 
t, min 
0 
4 
8 
16 
36 
PureAat609K 
no atm 
1 0.75 
0.67 
0.6 
0.55 
2A+R 
Nonporous catalyst, 
2 gin, 1 crn3 bulk, 
void fraction = 0.5 
Figure P18.19 


=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
422 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
18.20. Our packed bed reactor runs the gas phase reaction A -+ R at 10 atm 
and 336"C, and gives 90% conversion of a pure A feed. However, the 
catalyst salesman guarantees that in the absence of any pore diffusion 
resistance our reaction will proceed on his new improved porous catalyst 
(ge = 2 X 
m3/m cat. s) with a rate given by 
mol 
-Y: 
= o.88cA m3 cat. 
which is much better than what we now can do. The catalyst is rather 
expensive, since it is formulated of compressed kookaburra droppings 
and it is sold by weight. Still, we'll try it when we next replace our catalyst. 
What diameter of catalyst balls should we order? 
18.21. A reaction A + R is to take place on a porous catalyst pellet (d, = 6 
mm, ge = 
m3/m cat. s). How much is the rate slowed by pore diffu- 
sional resistance if the concentration of reactant bathing the particle is 
100 mol/m3 and the diffusion-free kinetics are given by 
mol 
-rg = 0.1Ci- m3 cat. s 
18.22. In the absence of pore diffusion resistance a particular first-order gas- 
phase reaction proceeds as reported below. 
- rl" 
A - 
- 
mol/cm3 cat. s 
at 
CA = 
mol/cm3, 
at 1 atm and 400°C 
What size of spherical catalyst pellets (ge = 
cm3/cm cat as) would 
ensure that pore resistance effects do not intrude to slow the rate of re- 
action? 
The first-order decomposition of A is run in an experimental mixed flow 
reactor. Find the role played by pore diffusion in these runs; in effect 
determine whether the runs were made under diffusion-free, strong resis- 
tance, or intermediate conditions. 


=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
Problems 423 
18.26. Find the activation energy of the first-order reaction from the following 
data: 
18.27. What can you tell about the influencing resistances for the porous catalyst 
from the data of Table P18.27 obtained in a recycle type mixed flow 
reactor. In all runs the leaving stream has the same composition, and 
conditions are isothermal throughout. 
Table P18.27 
Measured 
Quantity of 
Pellet 
Flow Rate of 
Recycle 
Reaction 
Catalyst 
Diameter 
Given Feed 
Rate 
Rate, - r i  
1 
1 
1 
High 
4 
4 
1 
4 
Higher still 
4 
1 
2 
1 
Higher still 
3 
4 
2 
4 
High 
3 
18.28. Experiments at 300°C in a packed bed reactor with very large recycle 
stream give the results shown below for the first order catalytic decomposi- 
tion A -+ R -, S. Under the best possible conditions (always at 300°C) 
what CR,,axICAO 
may we expect, and how do you suggest we get this (what 
flow pattern and particle size, large or small)? 
4 
1 
0.5 
No recycle 
8 
2 
0.5 
18.29. Experiments with a basket type mixed flow reactor on the solid catalyzed 
decomposition A -+ R -+ S give the results of Table P18.29. Under the 
best possible reaction conditions (always at 300°C) what is the maximum 
concentration of R we may expect? How do you suggest that this be ob- 
tained? 


=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
424 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Table P18.29 
Size of 
Porous Pellets 
Temperature 
WIFAO 
CR,,X/~AO 
6 mm 
300°C 
25 
23 % 
12 mm 
300°C 
50 
23 % 
18.30. Reactant A at CAo = 10 mol/m3 is to be passed through a packed bed 
catalytic reactor where it will decompose into either R or S. To maximize 
the formation of R and for 90% decomposition of A determine 
whether to operate in the strong pore diffusion regime or in the diffu- 
sion-free regime 
whether to use plug flow or mixed flow (high recycle) 
CR expected in the exit stream. 
The kinetics of the decomposition, when free of pore diffusion resistance, 
is given by 
18.31. A packed bed reactor converts A to R by a first-order catalytic reaction, 
A +R. With 9-mm pellets the reactor operates in the strong pore diffusion 
resistance regime and gives 63.2% conversion. If these pellets were re- 
placed by 18-mm pellets (to reduce pressure drop) how would this affect 
the conversion? 
18.32. We want to build a packed bed reactor filled with 1.2-cm porous catalyst 
particles (p, = 2000 kg/m3, .CBc = 2 x 
m3/m cat. s) to treat 1 m3/s of 
feed gas (113 A, 113 B, 113 inert) at 336OC and 1 atm to 80% conversion of 
A. Experiments with fine catalyst particles which are free from diffusional 
resistance show that 
How much catalyst must we use? 
18.33. In an experimental mixed flow reactor with 10 gm of 1.2-mm catalyst 
particles and a feed of 4 cm3/s of pure A at 1 atm and 336°C we get 80% 
conversion for the first-order reaction 
We want to design a commercial-sized reactor to treat large amounts of 
feed to 80% conversion at the above temperature and pressure. Our choice 


=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
Problems 425 
is between a fluidized bed of 1-mm particles (assume mixed flow of gas) 
and a packed bed of 1.5-cm particles. Which should we choose so as to 
minimize the amount of catalyst needed? How much advantage is there 
in this choice? 
Additional Data: For the catalyst particles: 
p, = 2000 kg/m3 
gk = 
m3/m cat. s 
In aqueous solution, and in contact with the right catalyst, reactant A is 
converted to product R by the elementary reaction A -+ 2R. Find the 
mass of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor for 90% conversion of 
lo4 mol A/hr of feed having C, 
= lo3 mol/m3. For this reaction 
18.34. k"' = 8 x 
m3/m3 bed. s 
18.35. k"' = 2 m3/m3 bed. s 
Additional data: 
Diameter of porous catalyst pellets = 6 mm 
Effective diffusion coefficient of A in the pellet = 4 X 
m3/m cat. s 
Voidage of packed bed = 0.5 
Bulk density of packed bed = 2000 kg/m3 of bed 
18.36. A first-order catalytic reaction A(1) -+ R(1) is run in a long, narrow vertical 
reactor with upflow of liquid through a fluidized bed of catalyst particles. 
Conversion is 95% at the start of operations when the catalyst particles 
are 5 mm in diameter. The catalyst is friable and slowly wears away, 
particles shrink and the fine powder produced washes out of the reactor. 
After a few months each of the 5-mm spheres has shrunk to 3-mm spheres. 
What should be the conversion at this time? Assume plug flow of liquid. 
(a) Particles are porous and allow easy access for reactants (no resistance 
to pore diffusion). 
(b) Particles are porous and at all sizes provide a strong resistance to 
pore diffusion. 
18.37. At present we are running our catalytic first-order reaction in the strong 
pore diffusion regime in a packed bed reactor filled with platinum impreg- 
nated 6-mm particles of uniform size. A catalyst manufacturer suggests 
that we replace our catalyst with 6-mm pellets consisting of fused 0.06- 
mm grains. The voidage between grains in the pellet would be about 25%. 
If these new pellets were free of pore diffusion resistance in their large 
voids (between grains), but if the grains were still in the strong diffusional 
resistance regime, how would this change affect the weight of catalyst 
needed and the reactor volume? 
18.38. Instead of impregnating the whole porous particle uniformly with platinum 
(see Problem 18.37), suppose we only impregnate the outer layer of the 


=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
426 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
spherical particle to a thickness of 0.3 mm. How much platinum do we 
save by this change? Assume that we are in the strong pore diffusion 
regime throughout. 
18.39. Because the catalytic reaction A -+R is highly exothermic with rate highly 
temperature-dependent, a long tubular flow reactor immersed in a trough 
of water, as shown in Fig. P18.39, is used to obtain essentially isothermal 
kinetic data. Pure A at O°C and 1 atrn flows through this tube at 10 cm3/ 
sec, and the stream composition is analyzed at various locations. 
Determine what size of plug flow reactor operating at O°C and 1 atrn would 
give 50% conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 100 kmollhr of pure A. 
Distance from feed 
input, meters 
Partialpressureof 
A, mm Hg 
\ \ \ 
Nonporous catalyst 2 gm, 
1 cm3 bulk, fraction voids = 0.5 
0 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
84 
(00) 
760 600 475 390 320 275 240 215 
150 
Figure P18.39 
18.40. A closed-loop experimental G/S batch system as sketched in Fig. P18.19 
is used to study the kinetics of a catalytic reaction A -+ 2R. Pure A is 
introduced into the systems and is circulated at O°C and 1 atrn at 10 cm3/sec. 
The stream is analyzed from time to time with the following results: 
(a) Determine the size of a plug flow reactor operating at O°C and 1 atrn 
required to effect a 50% conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 100 
kmol Alhr. 
(b) Repeat part a with the modification that an inert at a partial pressure 
of 1 atrn is present in the closed loop so that the total pressure at the 
start is 2 atm. 
Time, min 
Partialpressure 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
(00) 
760 
600 
475 
290 
320 
275 
240 
215 
150 
of A, mm Hg 


=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
Chapter 19 
The Packed Bed Catalytic 
Reactor 
Reactant gas can be made to contact solid catalyst in many ways, and each has 
its specific advantages and disadvantages. Figure 19.1 illustrates a number of 
these contacting patterns. These may be divided into two broad types, the fixed- 
bed reactors of Fig. 1 9 . 1 ~ ~  
b, and c and the fluidized-bed reactors of Figs. 19.ld, 
e, and f. The moving-bed reactor of Fig. 19.lg is an intermediate case which 
embodies some of the advantages and some of the disadvantages of fixed-bed 
and fluidized-bed reactors. Let us compare the merits of these reactor types. 
1. In passing through fixed beds, gases approximate plug flow. It is quite 
different with bubbling fluidized beds where the flow is complex and not 
well known, but certainly far from plug flow, and with considerable by- 
passing. This behavior is unsatisfactory from the standpoint of effective 
contacting and requires much more catalyst for high gas conversion, and 
greatly depresses the amount of intermediate which can be formed in series 
reactions. Hence, if efficient contacting in a reactor is of primary importance, 
then the fixed bed is favored. 
2. Effective temperature control of large fixed beds can be difficult because 
such systems are characterized by a low heat conductivity. Thus in highly 
exothermic reactions hot spots or moving hot fronts are likely to develop 
which may ruin the catalyst. In contrast with this, the rapid mixing of solids 
in fluidized beds allows easily and reliably controlled, practically isothermal, 
operations. So if operations are to be restricted within a narrow temperature 
range, either because of the explosive nature of the reaction or because of 
product distribution considerations, then the fluidized bed is favored. 
3. Fixed beds cannot use very small sizes of catalyst because of plugging and 
high-pressure drop, whereas fluidized beds are well able to use small-size 
particles. Thus for very fast reactions in which pore and film diffusion may 
influence the rate, the fluidized bed with its vigorous gas-solid contacting 
and small particles will allow a much more effective use of the catalyst. 
4. If the catalyst has to be treated (regenerated) frequently because it deacti- 
vates rapidly, then the liquid-like fluidized state allows it to be pumped easily 
from unit to unit. This feature of fluidized contacting offers overwhelming 
advantages over fixed bed operations for such solids. 
427 


=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
428 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Coolant- 
in 
in 
t 
Gas in 
t 
Reactant 
gas in 
(a) 
(b) 
Packed bed, first stage, 
small amount of catalyst 
Gas in 
(c) 
Reactant 
gas in 
t 
(d) 
Regenerator (shown 
as a flu~d~zed 
bed) 
Regenerated 
catalyst returned to 
the flu~d~zed 
bed 
Regenerator 
gas 
(e) 
Figure 19.1 Various types of catalytic reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 429 
Catalyst to 
regenerator 
~eactant fl ' 
gas in 
(f) 
Figure 19.1 (Continued.) 
Catalyst 
i. 
Fluidized 
in 
bed 
M o\ 
of 
Gas out 
~i ng bed - 
solids 
Sidestream to 
regenerator 
Bucket elevator or 
hydraulic lift to raise 
catalyst to top of reactor 
@ 
Reactant f 
u 
gas in - 
With these points in mind, let us proceed to Fig. 19.1. Figure 1 9 . 1 ~  
is a typical 
packed bed reactor embodying all its advantages and disadvantages. Figure 19.lb 
shows how the problem of hot spots can be substantially reduced by increasing 
the cooling surface. Figure 1 9 . 1 ~  
shows how intercooling can still further control 
the temperature. Note that in the first stage where reaction is fastest, conversion 
is kept low by having less catalyst present than in the other stages. Units such 
as these can all be incorporated in a single shell or can be kept separate with 
heat exchanges between stages. 
Figure 19.ld shows a fluidized reactor for a stable catalyst which need not be 
regenerated. The heat exchanger tubes are immersed in the bed to remove or 
add heat and to control the temperature. Figure 19.le shows operations with a 
deactivating catalyst which must be continually removed and regenerated. Figure 
19.lf shows a three-stage countercurrent unit which is designed to overcome the 
shortcomings of fluidized beds with regard to poor contacting. Figure 19.lg shows 
a moving-bed reactor. Such units share with fixed beds the advantages of plug 
flow and disadvantages of large particle size, but they also share with fluidized 
beds the advantages of low catalyst-handling costs. 
Many factors must be weighed to obtain optimum design, and it may be that 
the best design is one that uses two different reactor types in series. For example, 
for high conversion of a very exothermic reaction we may well look into the use 
of a fluidized bed followed by a fixed bed. 
The main difficulties of design of catalytic reactors reduce to the following 
two questions: (1) How do we account for the nonisothermal behavior of packed 
beds? and (2) How do we account for the nonideal flow of gas in fluidized beds. 
Consider a packed bed with heat exchange (Figs. 1 9 . 1 ~  
and 19.lb). For an 
exothermic reaction Fig. 19.2 shows the types of heat and mass movement that 
will occur when the packed bed is cooled at the walls. The centerline will be 
hotter than the walls, reaction will be faster, and reactants will be more rapidly 
consumed there; hence, radial gradients of all sorts will be set up. 


=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
430 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Walls cooled 
to 100" 
Reactant 
Product 
I 
flows inward 
flows outward 
Depletion of reactant 
at centerline 
Heat flows 
outward 
Figure 19.2 The temperature field in a packed bed reactor for an exother- 
mic reaction creates radial movement of heat and matter. 
The detailed analysis of this situation should include the simultaneous radial 
dispersion of heat and matter, and maybe axial dispersion too. In setting up 
the mathematical model, what simplifications are reasonable, would the results 
properly model the real situation, would the solution indicate unstable behavior 
and hot spots? These questions have been considered by scores of researchers, 
numerous precise solutions have been claimed; however, from the point of view 
of prediction and design the situation today still is not as we would wish. The 
treatment of this problem is quite difficult, and we will not consider it here. A 
good review of the state-of-the-art is given by Froment (1970), and Froment and 
Bischoff (1990). 
The staged adiabatic packed bed reactor of Fig. 19.1~ 
presents a different 
situation. Since there is no heat transfer in the zone of reaction the temperature 
and conversion are related simply, hence the methods of Chapter 9 can be applied 
directly. We will examine numerous variations of staging and heat transfer to 
show that this is a versatile setup which can closely approximate the optimum. 
The fluidized bed and other suspended solid reactor types are considered in 
the next chapter. 
Staged Adiabatic Packed Bed Reactors 
With proper interchange of heat and proper gas flow, staged adiabatic packed 
beds become a versatile system, which is able to approximate practically any 
desired temperature progression. Calculation and design of such a system is 
simple, and we can expect that real operations will closely follow these predic- 
tions. 
We illustrate the design procedure with the single reaction A + R with any 
kinetics. This procedure can be extended to other reaction types without diffi- 
culty. We first consider different ways of operating these reactors, and then 
compare these and point out when one or other is favored. 
Staged Packed Beds (Plug Flow) with Intercooling.' 
The reasoning in Chapter 
9 shows that we would like the reacting conditions to follow the optimal tempera- 
' This section follows directly from pp. 215-235 of Chapter 9. Hence it is suggested that the reader 
familiarize himself with that section before proceeding here. 


=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 431 
I Exothermic reversible I 
I Exothermic irreversible I 
I 
Optimum 4 
T,,, 
I Endothermic / 
Optimum 
Figure 19.3 Sketch showing how staged packed beds can closely approach the optimal tempera- 
ture progression. 
ture progression. With many stages available this can be closely approximated, 
as shown in Fig. 19.3. 
For any preset number of stages the optimization of operations reduces to 
minimizing the total amount of catalyst needed to achieve a given conversion. 
Let us illustrate the procedure for two-stage operations with reversible exothermic 
reactions. The method of attack is shown in Fig. 19.4. In this figure we wish to 
minimize the total area under the 11-6 versus X ,  curve in going from X ,  = 0 
to X ,  = some fked or required conversion. In searching for this optimum we 
have three variables which we can set at will: the incoming temperature (point 
T,), the amount of catalyst used in the first stage (locates point b along the 
adiabatic), and the amount of intercooling (locates point c along the bc line). 
Fortunately, we are able to reduce this 3-dimensional search (5-dimensional for 
Area measures 
Figure 19.4 Optimum two-stage packed bed reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
432 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
three stages, etc.) to a one-dimensional search where Ta alone is guessed. The 
procedure is as follows: 
1. Guess Ta. 
2. Move along the adiabatic line until the following condition is satisfied: 
This gives point b in Fig. 19.4, thus the amount of catalyst needed in the 
first stage as well as the outlet temperature from that stage. Especially in 
preliminary design it may not be convenient to use the criterion of Eq. 1. A 
simple alternative is a trial-and-error search. Usually two or three carefully 
chosen trials keeping away from low rate conditions will yield a good 
design, close to the optimum. 
3. Cool to point c which has the same rate of reaction as point b; thus 
(-ra)leaving a reactor = ( -ra)entering the next reactor 
4. Move along the adiabatic from point c until the criterion of Eq. 1 is 
satisfied, giving point d. 
5a. If point d is at the desired final conversion then we have guessed T, cor- 
rectly. 
5b. If point d is not at the desired final conversion try a different incoming 
temperature T,. Usually three trials will very closely approach the op- 
timum. 
For three or more stages the procedure is a direct extension of that presented 
here, and it still remains a one-dimensional search. This procedure was first 
developed by Konoki (1956a) and later, independently, by Horn (1961a). 
Overall cost considerations will determine the number of stages to be used, 
so in practice we examine 1, then 2, etc., stages until a minimum cost is obtained. 
Let us next consider the two other cases of Fig. 19.3. For irreversible exothermic 
reactions the criterion for optimal operations has also been presented by Konoki 
(1956b). For endothermic reactions the optimal criterion has yet to be developed. 
In all these cases a trial-and-error search keeping far from the regions of low 
rates is recommended. 
Staged Mixed Flow Reactors. For very high recycle the staged recycle reactors 
approach mixed flow. As shown in Fig. 19.5, in this case the reactors should 
operate on the line of optimum temperature progression, the best distribution 
of catalyst among the stages being found by the maximization of rectangles (see 
Figs. 6.9-6.11). In effect we need to choose the distribution of catalyst so as to 
maximize area KLMN which then minimizes the shaded area in Fig. 19.5. 
Staged Packed Beds with Recycle. Here we have a flexible system which can 
approach mixed flow and as such is able to avoid regions of low rates. Figure 


=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 433 
Figure 19.5 Optimum two-stage mixed flow reactor set up (infinite recycle 
for staged packed beds). 
19.6 illustrates two-stage operations with a recycle ratio R = 1, and a feed 
temperature Tf. Extension to three or more stages follows directly. 
Konoki (1961) presents the criterion for optimal operations; however, in pre- 
liminary design a few good guesses will suffice to closely approach optimal opera- 
tions. 
In recycle operations the heat exchangers can be located in a number of places 
without affecting what goes on in the reactor. Figure 19.6 illustrates one of these; 
other alternatives are shown in Fig. 19.7. The best location will depend on 
Figure 19.6 Optimum two-stage packed bed reactor with recycle. The 
conversions shown represent a recycle ratio R = 1 in both stages. 


=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
434 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
\I 
* T 
Tf 
Figure 19.7 Different location for the heat exchangers while keeping 
the same reactor conditions as in Fig. 19.6. 
convenience for startup, and on which location gives a higher heat transfer 
coefficient (note that the exchanger arrangement of Fig. 19.7a has a higher 
through-flow of fluid than the arrangement of Fig. 19.7b). 
Cold Shot Cooling. One way of eliminating the interstage heat exchangers is 
by properly adding cold feed directly into the second and succeeding stages of 
the reactor. The procedure is shown in Fig. 19.8. The criterion for optimal 
operations of such an arrangement is given by Konoki (1960), and, in somewhat 
different form, by Horn (1961b). They found that the extent of interstage cooling 
is given by Eq. 2, and this is shown in Fig. 19.8. 
With cold shot cooling the calculation of reactor volumes by the 11-ri versus 
X, curve beco~lles more complicated because different amounts of feed are 
involved in each stage. We can also cold shot cool with inert fluid. This will 
affect both the 11-ri versus XA and T versus XA curves. 
Choice of Contacting System. With so many contacting alternatives let us sug- 
gest when one or other is favored. 
1. For endothermic reactions the rate always decreases with conversion; hence 
we should always use plug flow with no recycle (see Chapter 9). For exother- 


=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 435 
Qin 
Figure 19.8 Cold shot cooling eliminates interstage heat exchangers. 
mic reactions the slope of the adiabatic line determines which contacting 
scheme is best. The rest of these comments concern this case of exother- 
mic reactions. 
2. All else being equal, cold shot cooling has the advantage of lower cost 
because interstage heat exchangers are not needed. However, cold shot 
cooling is only practical when the feed temperature is very much below the 
reaction temperature, and, in addition, when the temperature does not 
change much during reaction. These conditions can be summarized as fol- 
lows: 
Cold shot cooling is practical when 
Two situations, one when cold shot cooling is practical, the other when it 
is not, are shown in Fig. 19.9. 
Figure 19.9 Situations where cold shot cooling could be helpful and where it should not 
be used. 


=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
436 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
3. For exothermic reactions if the slope of the adiabatic line is low (large 
temperature rise during reaction) it is advantageous to avoid the low temper- 
ature regime where the rate is very low. Thus use high recycle approaching 
mixed flow. On the other hand, if the slope is high (small temperature rise 
during reaction) the rate decreases with conversion and plug flow is to be 
used. Typically, for pure gaseous reactant the slope of the adiabatic is small; 
for a dilute gas or for a liquid it is large. As an example, consider a reactant 
having C, = 40 Jlmol K and AH, = - 120 000 Jlmol and inerts with C, = 
40 Jlmol . K: 
For a pure reactant gas stream 
For a dilute 1% reactant gas stream 
For a 1-molar liquid solution 
The adiabatic lines for these cases are sketched in Fig. 19.10 and illustrate 
this point. 
Use plug flow 
Plug vs. mixed flow 
1
5
0
0
 
K 
Extremely low 
rates here 
Figure 19.10 Sketch showing why plug flow is used for steep adiabatic 
lines, and mixed flow (packed beds with large recycle) for lines with 
small slope. 


=== PDF PAGE 69 ===


=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
438 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
4. For exothermic reactions in staged reactors the above discussion can be 
summarized as follows: 
use plug flow. 
For a dilute gas (or a solution) requiring large preheating to bring 
Preliminaries for a Set of Problems Dealing with a Single Packed Bed Reactor 
A single catalytic packed bed reactor is to be designed to treat 100 molls of 
reactant A and produce product R. Feed gas enters at 2.49 MPa and 300 K, the 
maximum allowable temperature is 900 K unless otherwise noted, the product 
stream is wanted at 300 K, and the thermodynamics and kinetics of the exothermic 
reaction are given to us in Fig. 19.11. Prepare a sketch showing the details of 
the system you plan to use: 
type of reactor: plug, recycle, or mixed (m recycle) 
amount of catalyst needed 
heat duty ahead of the reactor, at the reactor itself, and after the reactor 
the temperature of all flowing streams 
Example 19.1 treats one case, Problems 19.13 to 19.16 treat four other cases. 
In all these problems assume that 
we are dealing with ideal gases. 
Cp = 40 Jlmol . K for all materials, and at all temperatures. This means (from 
Example 9.1) that AH, has the same value at all temperatures. 
DESIGN OF A SINGLE ADIABATIC PACKED BED SYSTEM 
Work out a good design for 80% conversion of a feed consisting of 1 mol A and 
7 mol inert. 
First determine the slope of the adiabatic line. For this note that 8 moles enter1 
mole of A. Thus 
Cp = (40 Jlmol - K) (8) = 320 JI(mo1 of A + inerts) . K 
Thus the slope of the adiabatic is 


=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 439 
Drawing various adiabatics in Fig. 19.11 it seems that the one shown on Fig. 
E19.la looks best. So now tabulate XA versus ll(-ra) from Fig. 19.11. This gives 
Plotting ll(-ra) versus XA gives Fig. E19.lb. This tells right away that a recycle 
reactor should be used. Thus 
w - x~ - 0.8(6 X 8) = 38.4 kg. slmol 
F~~ -;a 
The recycle ratio, from Fig. E19.lb is R = 1. 
Figure E19.la,b 
The feed is available at 300 K, but enters the reactor at 600 K (from Fig. 
E19.la), so it must be heated. Thus 


=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
440 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
The product stream leaves the reactor at 800 K and must be cooled to 300 K, thus 
We show our recommended design in Fig. E19.1~. 
Figure E19.1~ 
Preliminaries for a Set of Problems Dealing with Two Packed Bed Reactors in 
Series 
Two catalyst filled packed bed reactors are to be designed to process 100 
molls of reactant A so as to produce product R. Feed gas enters at 2.49 MPa 
and 300 K, the allowable T,,, 
= 900 K, unless otherwise noted, T,, 
= 300 K, 
the product stream is wanted at 300 K, and the thermodynamics and kinetics of 
the exothermic reaction are given to us in Fig. 19.11. Prepare a sketch of your 
recommended design and on it show 
the flow arrangement selected: plug, recycle (give R value), or mixed (when- 
ever R > 5). Do not consider injection of cold fluid between stages unless 
the problem states that you are permitted to do so. 
weight of catalyst needed in each stage. 
location and duty of heat exchangers. 
temperature of the flowing streams. 
DESIGN OF A TWO ADIABATIC PACKED BED SYSTEM 
Work out a good design for 85% conversion of a pure A feed to two packed beds. 
I 
First determine the slope of the adiabatic line and draw it lightly on Fig. 18.11. 


=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 441 
(a) 
Figure E19.2a 
A 
Optimum 
1.0 
/ 
Equilibrium 
0.66 ---------------< 
--------- 
XA 
+ 
+ 4 ~ +  
4++*- 
Adiab$iL + 
+ ++-+ 
1 
This gives a very shallow adiabatic, as sketched in Fig. E19.2~. The rate continu- 
ally increases as you move along this adiabatic, thus use a mixed flow reactor 
operating at the optimum. 
To minimize the amount of catalyst needed Chapter 6 says use the method 
of maximization of rectangles, so tabulate XA versus ll(-r;),,, 
+4ce- 
And use the method of maximization of rectangles as shown in Fig. E19.2b. 
Then from the performance equation 
+ 
Slope = - 
2000 
W - 
= (XA) ------ - shaded area 
Fo 
(-r:)op, 
- (in Fig. E19.26 
we have 
W, = FA, (area), = 100 (2.376) = 237.6 kg 
and 
W2 = FA, (area), = 100 (3.819) = 381.9 kg 


=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
442 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Locus of 
optima 
-J-+ 
1 .o 
XA 
(6) 
Figure E19.2b 
Now to heat exchange: 
For the first reactor. If we want to cool the feed before introducing it into the 
first reactor we'd have to cool it to 
which is well below absolute zero. This is impossible. So we have to cool it 
somewhere inside the recycle reactor loop as shown in Fig. E19.2~. But wherever 
you put the exchanger the amount of heating or cooling needed is the same. 
So to go to 66% conversion at 820°C the amount of heat needed per mole of 
A is 
(820 - 300)40 + 0.66(-80000) = -32 000 Jlmol 
heat in 
heat out 
But for 100 molls of feed 
Q, = (32 000 J/mo1)(100 molls) = -3.2 MW (cooling) 
For the second reactor. To go from X, = 0.66 at 820 K to X, = 0.85 at 750 
K requires, per mole 
(750-820) 40 + (0.85 - 0.66) (-80 000) = -18 000 Jlmol 
So for 100 molls 
I 
Q2 = (- 18 000)(100) = - 1.8 MW (cooling) 


=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
Problems 443 
Similarly for the exchanger needed to cool the exit stream from 750 K to 300 K 
Q3 = 100(40)(300 - 750) = -1.8 MW 
So our recommended design is shown in Fig. E19.2~. 
Figure E19.2~ Note: exchanger Q, can be placed at A, B, or C and exchanger Q, can be placed 
at D, E, or F. 
REFERENCES 
Froment, G. F., First Symp. on C.R.E., Washington, D.C., June 1970, Advances in Chemis- 
try Series No. 109, A.C.S., 1972. 
- 
and Bischoff, K. B., Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, 2nd ed., John Wiley and 
Sons, 1990. 
Horn, F., 2. Electrochemie, 65,295 (1961a). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 14,20 (1961b). 
Konoki, K. K., Chem. Eng. (Japan), 21,408 (1956a). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 21,780 (1956b). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 24,569 (1960). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 25, 31 (1961). 
PROBLEMS 
19.1-19.8. Sketch the flow sheet for the two reactor system represented by the 
X, versus T diagrams Figs. P.19.1 to Fig. P19.8, and on the sketch show 
the flow rate of all streams for each 100 mol of entering fluid, and where 
pertinent give the recycle ratios. 
the location of the heat exchangers and indicate whether they cool 
or heat. 


=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
444 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Figures P19.1 to P19.8 


=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
Problems 445 
19.9-19.12. Sketch the XA versus T diagram for the two packed bed reactor 
system shown in Figs. P19.9 to P19.12 for an exothermic reaction where 
conversion: XAl = 0.6, XA2 = 0.9. 
recycle ratio: R, = 2, R, = 1. 
heat exchangers all cool the reacting fluid. 
12. 
Figures P19.9 to p19.12 
For the single reactor situation outlined in the text and followed by Exam- 
ple 19.1 let us here consider four alternatives. We plan to use 
19.13. . . . pure A feed, XA = 0.85, in a reactor which follows the optimal 
temperature progression. 
19.14. . . . a 50% A-50% inert feed, X, = 0.70, in an adiabatic reactor of 
your choice. 
19.15. . . . a 20% A-80% inert feed to an adiabatic reactor of your choice whose 
outlet is at XA = 0.75 and T = 825 K. 
19.16. . . . a 5% A-95% inert feed, XA = 0.5, in an adiabatic reactor of your 
choice. 


=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
446 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
For the two-reactor situation outlined in the text and followed by Example 19.2 
let us consider five alternatives, thus 
19.17. . . . a pure A feed, XA = 0.85. 
19.18. . . . a pure A feed, XA = 0.85 and T,,, 
= 550 K. In this problem, do not 
worry about the possibility of an unstable operating point. But before 
you build such a unit, you'd better check for this-otherwise 
you'll be 
in trouble. 
19.19. . . . a 20% A-80% inert feed, XA = 0.85 
19.20. . . . a 40% A-60% inert feed, XA = 0.95 
19.21. . . . a 5% A-95% inert feed, XA = 0.95 (try cold feed injection) 


=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
Chapter 20 
Reactors with Suspended Solid 
Catalyst, Fluidized Reactors of 
Various Types 
The formation of phthalic anhydride is highly exothermic, and even with the 
most careful design the heat removal from packed bed reactors can become 
uncheckable, leading to temperature runaways, meltdowns, and even explosions. 
If the chief engineer of those reactors had been required to sit on the reactor 
during start up, there would be fewer chief engineers ab0ut.l 
The invention of the fluidized bed with its suspended and rapidly mixing solids 
completely overcame this dangerous situation. This is because the rapid mixing 
of solids, and the large heat sink (the solids) will only allow the bed temperature 
to change very slowly, and it can be easily controlled. 
Another problem-catalyst 
formulators (those magicians) have been very 
successful in creating better and better catalysts, those that give higher and higher 
rates of reaction. But to use the whole of the catalyst volume effectively we must 
keep the Thiele modulus 
This means using smaller and smaller particles as k '  is made larger and larger. 
This leads us to use suspended solids. Also note that with these very effective 
catalysts the required residence time of reactant gas becomes very small, say a 
few seconds for a large 30-m high reactor. 
Figure 20.1 shows the transition from fixed to BFB to TF to FF to PC reactors. 
20.1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ABOUT SUSPENDED 
SOLIDS REACTORS 
This is a vast subject, but we must be brief and can only touch on the highlights. 
See Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) for a much more complete presentation. 
"They ought to give medals for making phthalic," Chem. Week, 70, 40 (1952). 


=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
448 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Fixed bed 
Bubbling 
fluidized 
Very 
little solids - 
throughflow 
Streaks ' 
and 
channels 
Turbulent 
Fast 
Pneumatic 
fluidized 
fluidized 
conveying 
m 
DEl 
m 
-Solids r 
solids 
Lean core 
dense wall 
- Solids 
Solids 
No throughflow of solids 
Throughflow of solids, leading 
to circulating fluidized beds 
Figure 20.1 G/S contacting regimes, from low to very high gas velocity. 
First, Geldart (1973) and Geldart and Abrahamson (1978) looked at how 
different kinds of solids behaved when fluidized, and came up with the following 
simple classification of solids which we now call the Geldart classification, thus 
Geldart A, B, C, D. These are shown and described in Fig. 20.2. 
Next consider the distribution of solids in the vertical vessel. Let f be the 
volume fraction of solids at height z of the vessel. Then as shown in Fig. 20.3 
when we go to higher and higher gas velocities the solids spread throughout 
the vessel. 
t 
I 
I
!
 
1
1
 1
1
1
1
 
Bed expands, then 
I 
forms bubbles. 
These split and *\ 
d 
Bubbles grow large. 
Bed internals help 
keep bubble size 
\ 
-A*.,- 
Difficult to 
fluidize. solids- 
Cohesive 
'+ o+, 
clump, and rise 
as slugs. Gas 
O.l 
channels 
10 
50 
100 
500 
1000 
Very large exploding 
bubbles. Low bed void- 
age. Liable to spout 
Figure 20.2 Geldart classification of solids in BFB. 


=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
20.1 Background Information about Suspended Solids Reactors 449 
I I \ 
Pneumatic convevinn (PC) 
11 
\ \ 
Fast fluidization (FF) 
low solid throughflow rate 
high solid throughflow rate 
C 
9 
a, 
\ 
Turbulent fluidization (TF) 
r: 
Bubbling bed (BFB) 
i 
o,2-0,4 
0.4-0.6 
I 
I 
I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
m3 solids 
(Volume fraction of solids)./ (=) 
-t 
Figure 20.3 Distribution of solids in the various con- 
tacting regimes. 
GIS Contacting Regimes. To develop the language that tells what contacting 
regime we have at hand consider solids of size d, in a bed of cross-sectional area 
A which is fed gas at a superficial gas velocity u,, as shown in Fig. 20.4. 
To simplify the equations let us start by defining two dimensionless quantities 
(1) 
Re, = u*d,* 
(2) 
Minimum Fluidizing Velocity. The solids will be suspended when the pressure 
drop exceeds the weight of solids. This happens when the gas velocity exceeds 
the minimum fluidizing velocity umf. This velocity is given by Ergun (1952), and 
in dimensionless form is 
Terminal Velocity, u,. Individual particles are blown out of the bed when the 
gas velocity exceeds what is called the terminal velocity, u,. Haider and Levens- 


=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
450 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
f [-I -volume fract~on of sol~ds In the bed 
€[-I -volume fract~on of vo~ds ~n the bed 
dJml -partrcle size 
ps[kglm31 -part~cle dens~ty 
I 
uo = superficial gas velocity 
(velocity if vessel is empty of solids) 
[m3 gas/m2 bed . 
sl 
Figure 20.4 Notation for a bed of suspended solids. 
pie1 (1989) give this velocity for spherical particles as 
and for irregularly shaped particles of sphericity 4, 
where the particle sphericity 4, is defined as 
4s= ( 
surface of a sphere 
surface of a particle volume 
For fine particles we evaluate the size by screen analysis, which gives d,,,. 
Unfortunately, there is no general relationship between dscr and d,. The best we 
can say for pressure drop considerations is 
dp = 4, d,, 
for irregular particles with no seeming longer or shorter di- 
mension 
* d, = ds, 
for irregular particles with one somewhat longer dimension 
but with length ratio not greater than 2 : 1 (eggs, for example) 
@ d 
4 d 
for irregular particles with one shorter dimension but with 
length ratio not less than 1 : 2 (pillows, for example) 
Although a single particle will be entrained by a stream of gas flowing faster 
than u,, this finding does not extend to a fluidized bed of particles. In the BFB 
the gas velocity can be many times greater than u, with very little carryover of 
solids. Thus the single particle terminal velocity is not very useful in estimating 
when entrainment of solids will become appreciable. 


=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
20.2 
The Bubbling Fluidized Bed-BFB 
451 
dp* 
dp" 
Figure 20.5 General flow regime diagram for the whole range of G/S contacting. 
General Chart Showing GIs Contacting Regimes. Grace (1986) prepared a 
graph to show the expected behavior of GIs systems all the way from BFB to 
CFB. Figure 20.5 shows a somewhat modified version of this chart. In it you will 
see Eqs. 3, 4, and 5, which tell when the bed will fluidize and when solids will 
begin to entrain from the vessel. 
We now look at the various contacting regimes in detail and see what predic- 
tions are available for each regarding reactor behavior. 
20.2 THE BUBBLING FLUIDIZED BED-BFB 
Pass gas upward through a bed of fine particles. For superficial (or inlet) gas 
velocities u, much in excess of this minimum the bed takes on the appearance 
of a boiling liquid with large bubbles rising rapidly through the bed. In this state 
we have the bubbling fluidized bed, BFB. Industrial reactors particularly for 
solid catalyzed gas-phase reactions often operate as bubbling beds with gas 
velocities u, = 5 - 30 u,. 
Calculations show that the conversion in bubbling beds may vary from plug 
flow to well below mixed flow, see Fig. 20.6, and for many years the perplexing 
and embarrassing thing about this was that often we could not reliably estimate 


=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
452 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Results from 8 different studies 
1 .  
I 
Plug flow 
I I 
I 
0.01; 
I 
20 
I 
I 
I 
I 
40 
60 
k"9T"' = k'7' 
Figure 20.6 Conversion of reactant in BFB is usually poorer than for both 
plug flow and mixed flow. Adapted from Kunii and Levenspiel (1991). 
or guess what it would be for any new situation. Because of this, scale-up was 
cautious and uncertain, and preferably left to others. 
It was soon recognized that this difficulty stemmed from lack of knowledge 
of the contacting and flow pattern in the bed: in effect, the bypassing of much 
of the solids by the rising bubble gas. This led to the realization that adequate 
prediction of bed behavior had to await a reasonable flow model for the bed. 
Since the bubbling bed represents such severe deviations from ideal contacting, 
not just minor ones as with other single-fluid reactors (packed beds, tubes, etc.), 
it would be instructive to see how this problem of flow characterization has been 
attacked. A wide variety of approaches have been tried. We consider these in turn. 
Dispersion and Tanks in Series Model. The first attempts at modeling naturally 
tried the simple one-parameter models; however, observed conversion well below 
mixed flow cannot be accounted for by these models so this approach has been 
dropped by most workers. 
RTD Models. The next class of models relied on the RTD to calculate conver- 
sions. But since the rate of catalytic reaction of an element of gas depends on 
the amount of solid in its vicinity, the effective rate constant is low for bubble 
gas, high for emulsion gas. Thus any model that simply tries to calculate conver- 


=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
20.2 
The Bubbling Fluidized Bed-BFB 
453 
sion from the RTD and the fixed rate constant in effect assumes that all elements 
of gas, both slow and fast moving, spend the same fraction of time in each of 
the phases. As we will show when we treat the details of gas contacting in 
fluidized beds this assumption is a shaky one, hence the direct use of the RTD 
to predict conversions, as developed for linear systems in Chapter 11, is quite inad- 
equate. 
Contact Time Distribution Models. To overcome this difficulty and still use 
the information given by the RTD, models were proposed which assumed that 
faster gas stayed mainly in the bubble phase, the slower in the emulsion. Gilliland 
and Knudsen (1971) used this approach and proposed that the effective rate 
constant depends on the length of stay of the element of gas in the bed, thus 
short stay means small k 
or k = k,tm 
long stay means large k 
where m is a fitted parameter. Thus combining with Eq. 11-13 we find for 
the conversion 
The problem with this approach involves obtaining a meaningful E function 
to use in Eq. 7 from a measured C-curve. This approach has also been discarded. 
Two-Region Models. Recognizing that the bubbling bed consists of two rather 
distinct zones, the bubble phase and the emulsion phase, experimenters spent 
much effort in developing models based on this fact. Since such models contain 
six parameters, see Fig. 20.7, many simplifications and special cases have been 
explored (eight by 1962,15 by 1972, and over two dozen to date), and even the 
complete six-parameter model of Fig. 20.7 has been used. The users of this model, 
.. 
. .  
. . 
. . 
.. 
... 
.. . 
Bubble 
Emulsion 
Fraction of 
solids here, ml 
Plu€! 
to 
Plup: to 
rn ixed 
mixed 
- \ I -  
Figure 20.7 Two-phase model to represent the bubbling fluidized bed, with 
its six adjustable parameters, v,, V,, (DIuL),, (DIuL),, m,, K. 


=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
454 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
those dealing with FCC reactors, claim that this model fits their data beautifully. 
However, they had to choose different sets of parameter values for each crude 
oil feed, in each of their FCC reactors. Also some of the values for their parame- 
ters made no physical sense, for example, a negative value for V, or v,. 
With this as the situation we should also discard this type of model which 
gives a perfect fit but predicts nothing, and brings no understanding with it. The 
reason is that we have no idea how to assign values to the parameters for new 
conditions. Thus this is just a curve-fitting model, and we should be able to 
do better. 
Hydrodynamic Flow Models. The discouraging result with the previous ap- 
proaches lead us reluctantly to the conclusion that we must know more about 
what goes on in the bed if we hope to develop a reasonable predictive flow 
model. In particular we must learn more about the behavior of rising gas bubbles, 
since they probably cause much of the difficulty. 
Two developments are of particular importance in this regard. The first is 
Davidson's remarkable theoretical development and experimental verification 
[see Davidson and Harrison (1963) for details] of the flow in the vicinity of a 
single rising bubble in a fluidized bed which is otherwise at minimum fluidizing 
conditions. What he found was that the rise velocity of the bubble u,, depends 
only on the bubble size, and that the gas behavior in the vicinity of the bubble 
depends only on the relative velocity of rising bubble and of gas rising in the 
emulsion u,. In the extremes he found completely different behavior, as shown 
in Fig. 20.8. For catalytic reactions we are only interested in fine particle beds, 
so let us ignore the large particle extreme from now on. 
Now, for the fine particle bed gas circulates within the bubble plus a thin cloud 
surrounding the bubble. Thus the bubble gas forms a vortex ring and stays 
segregated from the rest of the gas in the bed. Theory says that 
In fine particle beds 
Ub + U, 
Fast bubble 
Clouded bubble 
thickness of cloud 
diameter of bubble 
In large particle beds 
Ub < ue 
Slow bubble 
Cloudless bubble 
Figure 20.8 Extremes of gas flow in the vicinity of rising gas bubbles in BFBs. 


=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
20.3 
The K-L Model for BFB 455 
As an example if the bubble rises 25 times as fast as the emulsion gas (not all 
that uncommon because this ratio is 100 or more in some industrial operations), 
then the cloud thickness is just 2% of the bubble diameter. This is the regime 
which interests us. 
The second finding on single bubbles is that every rising gas'bubble drags 
behind it a wake of solids. We designate this wake by a, where 
volume of wake 
a varies between 0.2 and 2.0 
volume of bubble 
depending on the research study 
(9) 
See Rowe and Partridge (1962,1965) for the original study which discovered this. 
20.3 
THE K-L MODEL FOR BFB 
Hydrodynamic type flow models can be developed to represent the BFB, based 
on the above two seemingly simple findings. Let us consider and develop the 
simplest of these, the K-L BFB model. 
Pass an excess of gas upward through a bed of fine particles. With a large 
enough bed diameter we get a freely bubbling bed of fast bubbles. As simplifica- 
tions, assume the following: 
The bubbles are all spherical, all of the same size d,, and all follow the 
Davidson model. Thus the bed contains bubbles surrounded by thin clouds 
rising through an emulsion. We ignore the upflow of gas through the cloud 
because the cloud volume is small compared to that of the bubble. This is 
the regime where u, 
u, (see Fig. 20.8). 
The emulsion stays at minimum fluidization conditions, thus the relative 
G/S velocity stays constant in the emulsion. 
* Each bubble drags up a wake of solids behind it. This generates a circulation 
of solids in the bed, upflow behind the bubbles, and downflow everywhere 
else in the bed. If this downflow of solids is rapid enough then gas upflow 
in the emulsion is impeded, can actually stop, and even reverse itself. Such 
downflow of gas has been observed and recorded, and occurs when 
We ignore any upflow or downflow of gas in the emulsion. We show this model 
in Fig. 20.9. 
Let 
u, = superficial gas velocity in the bed, m3 gas/m2 bed - s 
d = diameter, m 
E = fraction of voids in the bed 
subscripts b, c, e, w refer to bubble, cloud, emulsion, and wake, respectively. 
subscripts m, 
mf, 
and f refer to packed bed, minimum fluidization, and bubbling 
fluidized bed conditions, respectively. 


=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
456 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
For gas u,, 
either up or- 
down 
US' - 
down 
Emulsion 
Cloud 
Bubble 
Wake 
uo 
Cloud and wake 
Figure 20.9 Model and symbols used to describe the K-L bubbling gas fluid- 
ized bed. 
In essence, given umf, emf, uo, a, and the effective bubble size in the bed d,, this 
model tells you all the other properties of the bed-flows, 
region volumes, 
interchange rates, and consequently reactor behavior. 
Material Balance for Gas and for Solids 
From Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) a material balance for the bed material gives 
ubr = 0 . 7 1 1 ( ~ d ~ ) ~ ' ~  
m/s ... rise velocity of a single bubble in a 
(10) 
bed otherwise at umf 
acceleration of gravity = 9.8mls2 
u, = u, - umf + ub1) mls 
rise velocity of bubbles in a bubbling bed (11) 
m3 bubbles 
S = bed fraction in bubbles, m3 bed 


=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 457 
Useful relationships: 
Hm(l - Em) = Hmf (1 - Emf) = Hf (1 - Ef) 
1 - E  
I -a=-= 
%...H=height 
1 - Emf 
Hf 
a8 ub 
us = 
m/s . . . downflow of emulsion solids 
i - ~ - ~ a '  
ue = %f - us, mls . . . rise velocity of emulsion gas (can be + or -) 
Emf 
Using Davidson's theoretical expression for bubble-cloud circulation and the 
Higbie theory for cloud-emulsion diffusion the interchange of gas between bubble 
and cloud is then found to be 
(interchange volume between 
b and c, or c and b)ls 
Kbc = 4.50 
+ 5.85 - 
- 
(2 ) 
) 
- 
volume of bubble 
, s-I 
and between cloud-wake and emulsion 
'I2 - interchange volumels -, 
volume of bubble , S 
volume of solids 
in bubble 
fb = 0.001 - 0.01 = 
. . . rough estimate from experiment 
volume of bed 
3umf /emf 
volume of solids in cloud and wake 
fc = 
- Emf) [ 
+,I = 
Ubr - 
IEmf 
volume of bed 
(16) 
- 
volume of solids in the rest of the emulsion 
fe = (1 - ~ m ~ ) ( l  
- 8) - 
fc - fb = 
volume of bed 


=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
458 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Application to Catalytic Reactions 
In our development we make two questionable assumptions: 
* We ignore the flow of gas through the cloud since the cloud volume is very 
small for fast bubbles. 
We ignore the flow of gas, either up or down, through the emulsion since 
this flow is much smaller than the flow through the bubbles. 
In effect, we consider the emulsion gas as stagnant. Of course more general 
expressions can be developed for beds where bubbles have thick clouds (not too 
large and fast bubbles), or where flow through the emulsion is significant (u, 
close to umf, thus where u, = 1-2 umf). However, for fast bubble, vigorously 
bubbling fine particle beds the above assumptions are reasonable. 
We next see how to calculate performance in such a bed. 
First-Order Reaction. Let the reaction be 
mol 
A+,, 
r A U r = k C A ,  - 
f 
m3s.s 
Then for any slice of bed we have 
reactant rising 1-transfer 
I 
reactant 
/-transfer 
I 
reactant 
in bubble 
6 Kbc, srl- 
in cloud 
6 Kc,, srl- 
in emulsion 
I 
reaction: fb k"', s-l 
bubble 
I 
reaction: f, k ,  s-l 
cloud 
I 
reaction: fe k ,  s-I 
emulsion 
Accounting for these five resistances in series-parallel, 
eliminating cloud and 
emulsion concentrations, and integrating from the bottom to the top of the 


=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 459 
bed gives 
We also find that the average gas composition seen by the solids is approximately 
(from S. Kimura, personal communication) 
of solids alone, WIp, 
This quantity is important for noncatalytic G/S reactions because it is this CA 
that the solids see and react with. 
Let us now look at packed bed reactors. Assuming plug flow Kbc + w, 
Kc, + a, so Eq. 21 reduces to 
in 
- 
&lfrf'' = k H p ( l  - E P ) = ktT' = - 
u 0 
k' 
(23) 
for plug flow 
CAP 
%A, 
- 
C
~
O
 - C ~ p  
C ~ p  
= 
J ~ " ~ I I I  
(24) 
Comparing Eq. 21 with 23, and Eq. 22 with 24 shows that a fluidized bed can 
be treated as a plug flow reactor if 
K is replaced by k'" 
Comments. The five terms in brackets of the performance equation, Eq. 21, 
represent the complex series-parallel resistances to mass transfer and reaction or 
Reactant A 
transfer 
+ 
in 
transfer 
- 
in 
in bubble 
to cloud 
cloud 
to emulsion 
emulsion 
reaction 
in bubble 
reaction 
in cloud 
reaction 
in emulsion 


=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
460 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
+- Large bubble 
+- Medium size bubble 
-- 
Small bubble 
0.06 - 
0.04 
I 
I 
I\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
f 
H 
k"' 
BFB 
, dimensionless time 
uo 
Figure 20.10 Performance of a fluidized bed as a function of bubble size, as deter- 
mined by Eq. 21. Compare with the plug flow and mixed flow predictions. 
For very fast reaction (large k '  value) very little A gets as far as the emulsion 
and the first two terms dominate. For slow reaction the latter terms become 
increasingly important. 
Since the bubble size is the one quantity which governs all the rate quantities 
with the exception of k ,  we can plot the performance of a fluidized bed as a 
function of d,, as shown in Fig. 20.10. Note that large d, gives poor performance 
because of extensive bypassing of bubble gas, and that the performance of the 
bed can drop considerably below mixed flow. 
For multiple reactions the effect of this flow is much more serious still. Thus 
for reactions in series the lowering in amount of intermediate formed can be 
and usually is quite drastic. 
Finally we have kept this presentation very brief. To help understand how to 
use it please look at the following illustrative example. 
:' First-Order Catalytic Reaction in a BFB 
Reactant gas (u, = 0.3 m/s, v, = 0.3 .rr m3/s passes upward through a 2-m diameter 
fluidized bed (umf = 0.03 m/s, emf = 0.5) containing 7 tons of catalyst (W = 7000 
kg, p, = 2000 kg/m3). Reaction proceeds as follows: 
m3 
A + R, 
-rz = kU'C, . . . with k"' = 0.8 - 
m 3 s . s  


=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 461 
(a) Calculate the conversion of reactant. 
(b) Find the proper mean concentration of A seen by the solids. 
(c) If gas were made to flow downward through the solids we would have a 
packed bed. Assuming plug flow of gas find the conversion of reactant for 
this situation. 
I Additional Data 
C, 
= 100 mol/m3, CZj = 20 X 
m2/s, a = 0.33 
Estimated bubble size in the bed: d, = 0.32 m 
See Fig. E20.1 which represents this system. 
I u,, = 0.3 rn/s 
CAO = 100 rnol/m3 
Figure E20.1 
1 SOLUTION 
Preliminary Determine the rise velocity of bubbles 
Now see whether the fast bubble model of this chapter applies. 
Check for slugging: The bubble size (32 cm) is small compared to the bed 
size (200 cm), hence no slugging. 
Check the fast bubble assumption: Take the velocity ratio 
Since the bubble rises -25 times as fast as the emulsion gas we have a fast 
bubble with thin cloud-less 
than 1 cm thick. 


=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
462 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Thus we can safely use the bubbling bed model of this chapter. 
(a) Calculate XA. Replacing numbers into the expressions for this model 
gives, in turn, 
fb = 0.001 - 0.01, choose it to be 0.001 
1 
Therefore 
CA = 0.68 . . .or Xn = 32% (see Fig. 20.10) 
'A0 
(b) Find cA 
seen by the solids. Since every particle samples all the gas in the 
bed, 7'" = (C,, - CA)l-r*, or 
(c) Calculate XA for a fixed bed. From Eq. 11.44 or 11.51, for plug flow, 


=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
20.3 
The K-L Model for BFB 463 
Therefore 
This point is shown in Fig. 20.10. 
Comments 
The conversion in the fluidized bed is drastically lower than in the packed 
bed (32% vs. 95%), and is even much below mixed flow (75%). This comes 
from the severe bypassing of reactant gas in the large gas bubbles. Reduce 
the size of bubbles in the bed and the conversion will rise spectacularly. 
Gas enters at CAo = 100, leaves at CA = 68; however, the solids see a much 
lower concentration of A, or CA = 11. Thus the solids, mostly in the emulsion, 
are starved for gaseous reactant. This sort of finding, quite general for fast 
bubble beds, is of great importance in GIS reactions. Thus in combustion 
and roasting of fine solids these solids may be starved for 0, even though 
the off gas from the bed may contain a significant amount of oxygen. 
Example 20.1 and the solutions to Problems 20.1 and 20.2 at the end of this 
chapter tell how conversion is affected by bubble size according to the 
K-L model. This is shown in Fig. 20.11. In all four cases the rate constant 
is the same and the catalyst is fixed at 7 tons, so k"' 7'" = f,,,,, HBFB
k l u ,  = 2.97. 
Multiple Reactions and Product Distribution in Fluidized Beds 
A derivation similar to that for single first-order reactions can be developed for 
the Denbigh reaction system 
t 
. . . . . . . . . .  
:: 
. . . . . . . . . . . .  
..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . .  '.: :... 1.:) 
.:.: . Plug :.....: 
.;i:;: 
. . . . . . . . . .  
..:.: 
.........:....... ::;' : 
. . . . . . .  
.
.
.
.
.
 
;:i, 
. 
:':. .::. :.,: 
: ' .: 
_ _ _ - _ .  
t 
Figure 20.11 Different bubble size gives different reactor perfor- 
mance. Data from Example 20.1 and Problems 20.3 and 20.4. 


=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
464 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
and its special cases 
These derivations are rather tedious, we will not give them here, but we refer 
the reader to Levenspiel (1996) Chapter 25 for them. However, to illustrate the 
general findings let us take one example: 
k;' 
k;l' 
k;" = 0.8 m3/(m solid)3 . s 
A-R-S 
kj" = 0.025 m3/(m solid)3 . s 
Let us suppose that these reactions take place in a BFB reactor having a gas 
flow rate similar to that of Example 20.1. 
Let us see how much catalyst is needed to achieve C,, ,,, for different sizes 
of bubbles in the BFB. The results are shown in Fig. 20.12. 
I+;i; 
= 9.5 tons 
= 15 tons 
= 16 cm 
I 
. . . .  
. 
. 
. . . . . . .  
N = 32 tons 
.&. 
. :?,,:. t ), 
db = 32 crn 
Figure 20.12 Different bubble sizes give different bed sizes for 
maximum production of intermediate. 


=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
20.4 
The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 
465 
The results of the calculations verify the general findings on bubbling fluid- 
ized beds. 
* The BFB always needs more catalyst than a fixed bed to achieve a given 
conversion of reactant, or to reach C,, 
,,,. 
For reactions in series the BFB always gives a lower yield of intermediate 
compared to a fixed bed. 
For reactions in parallel of the same reaction order the product distribution 
is the same in fixed and BFBs. 
Final Remarks About BFB 
The expressions developed in this chapter show that if we know emf, estimate a, 
and measure umf and u,, then all flow quantities and regional volumes can be 
determined in terms of one parameter, the bubble size. Figure 20.9 then repre- 
sents the model as visualized. The use of this model to calculate chemical reactor 
behavior is straightforward and direct. The special feature of this model is that 
its one parameter can be tested against what is measured and what is observed. 
Various other hydrodynamic models have been proposed recently, using other 
combinations of assumptions such as 
Changing bubble size with height in the bed 
Negligible bubble-cloud resistance 
Negligible cloud-emulsion resistance 
Nonspherical bubbles 
In all cases the underlying rationale for these hydrodynamic models rests on the 
observation that beds with identical solids and gas flow rates may develop either 
large bubbles or small bubbles depending on bed diameter, distributor design, 
baffle arrangement, etc.; thus, bubble size must enter as the primary parameter 
in the model. A consequence of this argument is that models which do not 
allow for different bubble sizes at given imposed bed conditions certainly cannot 
be adequate. 
The power of this class of model should be apparent. For example, even the 
simplest of these models, the one considered here, gives unexpected predictions 
(e.g., that most of the gas in the bed may be flowing downward) which are 
subsequently verified. More important still, this type of model can be tested, it 
can be shown to be wrong, and it can be rejected, because its one parameter, 
the bubble size, can be compared with observation. 
20.4 THE CIRCULATING FLUIDIZED BED-CFB 
At gas velocities higher than those used for BFBs we successively enter the 
turbulent (TB), fast fluidized (FF), and the pneumatic conveying (PC) regimes. 
In these contacting regimes solids are entrained out of the bed and must be 
replaced. Thus in continuous operations we have the CFB, shown in Fig. 20.1. 
Flow models are very sketchy for these flow regimes. Let us see what is known. 


=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
466 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Lean - 
.
.
.
.
 
. . . . .  
. ., . 
. 
. 
:. 
. 
.
.
.
 
. . . . .  
- Gas and 
solids 
Solids 
I 
Gas 
0.01-0.02 
0.2-0.4 
Figure 20.13 The TB and its solid distribution. 
The Turbulent Bed (TB) 
At higher gas velocities the BFB transforms into a TB-no 
distinct bubbles, 
much churning, and violent solid movement. The surface of the dense bed fades 
and solids are found increasingly in the lean region above the dense bed. 
The concentration of solids in the upper lean region can be reasonable repre- 
sented by an exponential decay function which starts from the value in the lower 
region f, and falls to fik the limiting value in an infinitely high vessel. This is the 
value for pneumatic conveying. 
The flow of gas in the dense region is somewhere between the BFB and plug 
flow. The TB is shown in Fig. 20.13. 
Unfortunately no reasonable flow model has been developed for the dense 
region of a TB. Research is needed here. 
In beds of both coarse and fine solids one may observe a somewhat different 
solid distribution with height-a 
distinct difference between dense and lean 
regions and a sharp dense phase surface, as shown in Fig. 20.14. This behavior 
is more typical of fluidized combustors, not catalytic reaction systems. 
Gas and 
solids 
Solids 
t 
Gas 
A 
dense bed 
Figure 20.14 Behavior of a TB of large and small particles. 


=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
20.4 
The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 467 
Lean 
- 
Dense 
solids 
f--+ 
Gas and 
At a cross 
section 
Solids 
t 
Gas 
Figure 20.15 Behavior of a FF 
Solid 
fraction 
Model 
I 
I 
Wall 
Upflow gas 
velocity 
Observed K; 
* 
0 
R 
Downf low 
f 
Wall 
\ 
/ 
At the cross section 
bed. 
The Fast Fluidized Bed (FF) 
At even higher gas velocity (see Fig. 20.5) the bed enters the FF regime. One 
characteristic of this transition is that the entrainment of solids rises dramatically 
at this point. Bi et al. (1995) found this transition to occur at 
In the FF regime the solid movement in the lower region of the vessel becomes 
less chaotic and seems to settle to a lean core surrounded by a denser annulus 
or wall zone. 
The upper region retains its exponential decay behavior. 
Figure 20.15 shows the distribution of solids in the whole FF bed and at a 
cross section. The model which represents the FF bed is shown in Fig. 20.16. 
Height 
solids 
mas 
and 
fluid flow) 
Solids 
Gas 
Figure 20.16 Model for a FF reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
468 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
The quantities that need to be known to predict the behavior of the FF reactor 
are "a," Kc,, fX, and f,. Measurements show that 
uoa = 2 - 4 s-I 
for Geldart A solids 
= 5 s-l 
for Geldart AB solids 
= 7 s-l 
for Geldart B solids 
Measured values for fX and fd have been summarized by Kunii and Levenspiel 
(1995). Values for Kc, have yet to be measured. The best we can do today is 
estimate their order of magnitude from K,, and Kc, of the BFB. So at this time 
we cannot predict reactor behavior. However, to see how to make the material 
balance and conversion calculation see the numerical example given in Kunii 
and Levenspiel (1997). 
Pneumatic Conveying (PC) 
Finally at the highest gas velocities we exceed what is called the choking velocity. 
Above this the bed is in pneumatic transport. This transition velocity depends 
on the solid flow rate, and according to Bi and Fan (1991) occurs at 
In the PC regime particles are well distributed in the reactor, with no wall or 
downflow zone, but with a slight decrease in solid fraction with height. So we 
can assume plug flow of solids and of gas up the vessel. 
The Downflow CFB 
Fluidized catalytic cracking reactors, called "cat crackers" or FCC reactors, are 
one of society's most important large-scale reactors. On an average, each such 
solids 
RGas 
and 
. . 
. . 
Denser 
Solids 
A 
f = f* + (fd- f*kaz 
1 
Note: very little + 
solids in the vessel 
10.06 
f 
I 
0.01-0.02 
Gas 
Figure 20.17 Model for a PC reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
20.4 The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 469 
unit processes about 6000 m3/day (40 000 barrelslday) of crude oil to produce 
gasoline, diesel fuel, and jet aircraft fuel to power the engines of today. There 
are about 420 FCC reactors in the world today, running day and night to satisfy 
the needs of our insatiable societies. 
These reactors take long chain hydrocarbons and crack them to produce a 
whole host of shorter chain hydrocarbons. To illustrate 
we want 
octane 
The original cat cracker was invented in the early 1940s and was one of 
chemical engineering's most important contributions to World War 11. However, 
those early units did not use very selective catalysts and, with their large deviations 
from plug flow, gave very little of whatever intermediate was desired. 
In the 1960s better (more selective) and more active catalysts were created, 
and the needed reaction time for the oil vapor was consequently reduced to 
seconds, so the upflow FF reactors were invented. Approaching closer to plug 
flow gave the designer better control of product distribution, and allowed produc- 
tion of a larger fraction of desired product: for example, octane for automo- 
bile fuel. 
With this development, most of the BFBs in the world were cut up for scrap 
to be replaced by upflow FF reactors. 
Today, approaching year 2000, engineers want to do better still. Why? Because 
increasing the production of desired product by 1% would increase the profit 
per reactor by $1 millon to $2 millionlyear. As Fig. 20.16 shows, the upflow FF 
reactor has a practically stagnant or a downsliding wall zone of catalyst and gas, 
and this results in deviation from plug flow. 
How to avoid this? The obvious answer is to use a downflow FF reactor. These 
can operate at very high gas velocities, and remain close to plug flow. 
Today much exciting research is going on in this area, and we may some day, 
not too far in the future, see many of the upflow short contact time FCC units 
be replaced by downflow units. The payoff for this would be enormous. 
Remarks About CFB 
Here we have sketched the three regimes of CFB and their general behavior; 
however, we have not presented their performance equations. The reason is that 
the parameters for their reasonable models are uncertain today; hence, the 
predictions based on these models will likewise be uncertain. Still the general 
material balances and the form of the performance equations are available, see 
Kunii and Levenspiel (1991, 1997). 


=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
470 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
20.5 THE JET IMPACT REACTOR 
The idea here is to force two streams, one of reactant, the other of a very hot 
heat carrier or catalyst, to collide at very high velocity and thereby mix intensely 
and react at high temperature. 
For an all-gas product, the product stream is rapidly quenched, while for a 
gas-solid product, a cyclone separates the two phases, after which the gas is rapidly 
cooled. By using the word "rapidly" we mean that the whole operation-mixing, 
reacting, separating and quenching-is 
done in 0.1 to 0.3 seconds. 
This type of reactor aims to challenge fast fluidization with its 1 to 10 second 
gas residence time as the prime reactor for the catalytic cracking of petroleum. 
The claim is that the higher cracking temperature and shorter residence time 
will give a very different-and 
better-distribution 
of reaction products. 
Another application is to ultrapyrolyze cellulose and other biomass wastes. 
Commercial tests show that one can transform about 75% of wood into oil, and 
about 70% of sawdust into oil-useful liquids having the consistency of light engine 
oil. Much research is proceeding on this application (from Bergougnou, 1998). 
REFERENCES 
Bergougnou, M. A. private communication, 1998. 
Bi, H. T., and Fan, L. S., Paper 101e, A.1.Ch.E. Annual Meeting, Los Angeles, 1991. 
Bi, H. T., Grace, J. R., and Zhu, J. X., Trans. I. Chem. E., 73,154 (1995). 
Davidson, J. F., and Harrison, D., Fluidized Particles, Cambridge Univ. Press, New 
York, 1963. 
Ergun, S., Chem. Eng. Prog., 48, 89 (1952). 
Geldart, D., Powder Technol., 7, 285 (1973). 
-, 
and Abrahamson, A. A., Powder Technol., 19,133 (1978). 
Gilliland, E. R., and Knudsen, C. W., Chem. Eng. Prog. Symp. Ser. 67 (116), 168 (1971). 
Grace, J. R., Can. J. Chem. Eng., 64, 353 (1986). 
Haider, A., and Levenspiel, O., Powder Technol., 58, 63 (1989). 
Kimura, S., private communication. 
Kunii, D., and Levenspiel, O., Fluidization Engineering, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Boston, MA, 1991. 
-, 
in Fluidization VIZI, Tours, p. 17 (1995). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 52, 2471 (1997). 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Rowe, P. N., and Partridge, B. A., Proc. Symp. on Interaction between Fluids and Particles, 
p. 135, I. Chem. E. (1962); Trans. I. Chem. E., 43,157 (1965). 
PROBLEMS 
A suggestion for raising the conversion in Example 20.1 is to use more 
solids. So for the same bed diameter (2 m) and same mean bubble size 
(0.32 m) find XA and the mean concentration of gas seen by the solids CA 
if we use 
20.1. . . . 14 tons of catalyst 
20.2. . . . 21 tons of catalyst 


=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
Problems 471 
In Example 20.1 the conversion is very low and unsatisfactory. One sugges- 
tion for improvement is to insert baffles into the bed and thereby cut down 
the effective bubble size. Find X, if 
20.3. . . . d, = 16 cm 
20.4. . . . d, = 8 cm 
In Example 20.1 another suggestion for improving performance is to use a 
shallower bed, keeping W unchanged, thereby decreasing the superficial 
gas velocity. Find X, if we double the bed cross-sectional area (thus make 
u, = 15 c d s )  and 
20.5. . . . keep db unchanged at d, = 32 cm 
20.6. . . . make d, = 8 cm by suitable baffles 
20.7. In Example 20.1 still another suggestion is to use a narrower and taller 
bed, keeping W unchanged. Following this suggestion find X, if we halve 
the bed cross-sectional area (thus make u, = 60 cmls) and keep d, = 32 cm. 
20.8. Example 20.1 showed that a 7-ton bed with 32-cm bubbles gave 32% conver- 
sion. Suppose we diluted the catalyst 1 : 1 with inert solids ending up with 
a 16ton bed. How would this affect the conversion of reactant? Would it 
be higher or lower than 32%? 
20.9. Mathis and Watson in AIChE J., 2, 518 (1956) reported on the catalytic 
conversion of cumene in both fluidized and packed beds of catalyst 
catalyst 
C9Hl2 + 0 2 ~ C 6 H 5 0 H  
+ (CH,),O + C 
cumene 
phenol 
acetone 
In very dilute cumene-air mixtures the kinetics are essentially first-order 
reversible with respect to cumene with an equilibrium conversion of 94%. 
In packed bed experiments (H, = 76.2 mm) using downflow of gas 
(u, = 64 m d s )  the conversion of cumene was found to be 60%. However, 
with upflow of gas at the same flow rate in the same bed, the solids fluidize 
(u,, = 6.1 mmls) and bubbles of gas were observed roughly 13.5 mm in 
diameter. What conversion do you expect to find under these conditions? 
Estimated values: 


=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
472 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
20.10. Calculate the conversion in a fluidized bed reactor for the catalytic hydro- 
genation of nitrobenzene to analine. 
catalyst 
C6H5N02(g) + 
C6H~NH2(g) + H2°(g) 
(A) 
(R) 
Data: 
H, = 1.4 m 
p, = 2.2 g/cm3 
d, = 10 cm 
d, = 3.55 m 
!Zeff = 0.9 cm2/s 
a = 0.33 
T = 270°C 
umf = 2 cm/s 
E, = 0.4071 
u, = 30 cm/s 
= 0.60 
We plan to use an excess of hydrogen in which case we can ignore expan- 
sion, and can assume simple first-order kinetics: 
A + R 
-rx = k"' C, with kN' = 1.2 cm3/cm3 cat . s 
20.11. In a laboratory packed bed reactor (H, = 10 cm and u, = 2 cmls) 
conversion is 97% for the first-order reaction A + R. 
(a) Determine the rate constant k"' for this reaction. 
(b) What would be the conversion in a larger fluidized bed pilot plant 
(H, = 100 cm and u, = 20 cmls) in which the estimated bubble size 
is 8 cm? 
(c) What would be the conversion in a packed bed under the conditions 
of part (b)? 
Data: From experiment, 
umf = 3.2 cmls, 
emf = E, 
= 0.5 
From the literature, 
!Z = Be = 3 X 
cm2/s, 
a = 0.34 


=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
Chapter 21 
Deactivating Catalysts 
The previous chapters assumed that the effectiveness of catalysts in promoting 
reactions remains unchanged with time. Often this is not so, in which case the 
activity usually decreases as the catalyst is used. Sometimes this drop is very 
rapid, in the order of seconds; sometimes it is so slow that regeneration or 
replacement is needed only after months of use. In any case, with deactivating 
catalysts regeneration or replacement is necessary from time to time. 
If deactivation is rapid and caused by a deposition and a physical blocking of 
the surface this process is often termed fouling. Removal of this solid is termed 
regeneration. Carbon deposition during catalytic cracking is a common example 
of fouling 
If the catalyst surface is slowly modified by chemisorption on the active sites 
by materials which are not easily removed, then the process is frequently called 
poisoning. Restoration of activity, where possible, is called reactivation. If the 
adsorption is reversible then a change in operating conditions may be sufficient to 
reactivate the catalyst. If the adsorption is not reversible, then we have permanent 
poisoning. This may require a chemical retreatment of the surface or a complete 
replacement of the spent catalyst. 
Deactivation may also be uniform for all sites, or it may be selective, in which 
case the more active sites, those which supply most of the catalyst activity, are 
preferentially attacked and deactivated. 
We will use the term deactivation for all types of catalyst decay, both fast and 
slow; and we will call any material which deposits on the surface to lower its 
activity a poison. 
This chapter is a brief introduction to operations with deactivating catalysts. 
We will consider in turn: 
The mechanisms of catalyst decay 
The form of rate equation for catalyst decay 
How to develop a suitable rate equation from experiment 
* How to discover the mechanism from experiment 
Some consequences for design 


=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
474 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Although this is basically a rather involved subject, still its very importance from 
the practical standpoint requires at least an introductory treatment. 
21.1 MECHANISMS OF CATALYST DEACTIVATION 
The observed deactivation of a porous catalyst pellet depends on a number of 
factors: the actual decay reactions, the presence or absence of pore diffusion 
slowdown, the way poisons act on the surface, etc. We consider these in turn. 
Decay Reactions. Broadly speaking, decay can occur in four ways. First, the 
reactant may produce a side product which deposits on and deactivates the 
surface. This is called parallel deactivation. Second, the reaction product may 
decompose or react further to produce a material which then deposits on and 
deactivates the surface. This is called series deactivation. Third, an impurity 
in the feed may deposit on and deactivate the surface. This is called side-by- 
side deactivation. 
If we call P the material which deposits on and deactivates the surface, we 
can represent these reactions as follows: 
Parallel deactivation: 
Series deactivation: 
Side-by-side deactivation: 
The key difference in these three forms of decay reactions is that the deposition 
depends, respectively, on the concentration of reactant, product, and some other 
substance in the feed. Since the distribution of these substances will vary with 
position in the pellet, the location of deactivation will depend on which decay 
reaction is occurring. 
A fourth process for catalyst decay involves the structural modification or 
sintering of the catalyst surface caused by exposure of the catalyst to extreme 
conditions. This type of decay is dependent on the time that the catalyst spends 
in the high temperature environment, and since it is unaffected by the materials 
in the gas stream we call it independent deactivation. 
Pore Diffusion. For a pellet, pore diffusion may strongly influence the progress 
of catalyst decay. First consider parallel deactivation. From Chapter 18 we know 
that reactant may either be evenly distributed throughout the pellet (M, < 0.4 


=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 475 
and 6 = 1) or may be found close to the exterior surface (M, > 4 and 8 < 1). 
Thus the poison will be deposited in a like manner-uniformly 
for no pore 
resistance, and at the exterior for strong pore resistance. In the extreme of very 
strong diffusional resistance a thin shell at the outside of the pellet becomes 
poisoned. This shell thickens with time and the deactivation front moves inward. 
We call this the shell model for poisoning. 
On the other hand, consider series deactivation. In the regime of strong pore 
resistance the concentration of product R is higher within the pellet than at 
the exterior. Since R is the source of the poison, the latter deposits in higher 
concentration within the pellet interior. Hence we can have poisoning from the 
inside-out for series deactivation. 
Finally, consider side-by-side deactivation. Whatever the concentration of re- 
actants and products may be, the rate at which the poison from the feed reacts 
with the surface determines where it deposits. For a small poison rate constant 
the poison penetrates the pellet uniformly and deactivates all elements of the 
catalyst surface in the same way. For a large rate constant poisoning occurs at 
the pellet exterior, as soon as the poison reaches the surface. 
The above discussion shows that the progress of deactivation may occur in 
different ways depending on the type of decay reaction occurring and on the 
value of the pore diffusion factor. For parallel and series poisoning, the Thiele 
modulus for the main reaction is the pertinent pore diffusion parameter. For side- 
by-side reactions, the Thiele modulus for the deactivation is the prime parameter. 
Nonisothermal effects within pellets may also cause variations in deactivation 
with location, especially when deactivation is caused by surface modifications 
due to high temperatures. 
Additional Factors Influencing Decay. Numerous other factors may influence 
the observed change in activity of catalyst. These include pore mouth blocking 
by deposited solid, equilibrium, or reversible poisoning where some activity 
always remains, and the action of regeneration (this often leaves catalyst with 
an active exterior but inactive core). 
Most important of all, the observed deactivation may result from a number 
of processes at work simultaneously; for example, the speedy immobilization of 
the most active sites by poison PI, and then the slower attack of the remainder 
of the sites by P,. 
Although the possible influence of all these factors should be examined in the 
real case, in this introductory treatment we will concentrate on the first two 
factors: the decay reaction and pore diffusion. There are enough lessons here to 
illustrate how to approach the more complete problem. 
21.2 THE RATE AND PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS 
The activity of a catalyst pellet at any time is defined as 
rate at which the pellet converts reactant A - - T i  
a =  
-- 
rate of reaction of A with a fresh pellet 


=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
476 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
and in terms of the fluid bathing the pellet the rate of reaction of A should be 
of the following form: 
main stream 
main stream 
temperature 
concentration 
present activity of 
(5) 
the catalyst pellet 
Similarly, the rate at which the catalyst pellet deactivates may be written as 
( d e a ~ t i o n )  = , 
( main stream 
main stream 
temperature 
concentration 
present state of 
(6) 
the catalyst pellet 
In terms of nth-order kinetics, Arrhenius temperature dependency, and iso- 
thermal conditions, Eq. 5 becomes, for the main reaction: 
and for deactivation which in general is dependent on the concentration of gas- 
phase species, Eq. 6 becomes 
where d is called the order of deactivation, m measures the concentration depen- 
dency and Ed is the activation energy or temperature dependency of the deacti- 
vation. 
For different decay reactions we may expect different forms for the above 
equations. Thus 
- r i  = ktCia 
For parallel deactivation 
(A+R;A+PJ) 
-- 
da - 
- k Cmad 
dt 
d
A
 
= k t  C i a  
For series deactivation 
(A+R+PJ) 
-- 
da - 
- k c m a d  
dt 
d
R
 


=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 477 
-7; = kr Cia 
For side-by-side deactivation 
(A+R;P-Pi) 
-- 
da - 
- k p a d  
dt 
d
P
 
-r; = k1C%a 
For independent deactivation 
(concentration independent) 
-4 = kdad 
dt 
In certain reactions, such as isomerizations and cracking, deactivation may be 
caused both by reactant and product, or 
A-R 
da 
A d P J  
and 
--- 
dt - kd(CA + CR)mad 
R + P i  
Since CA + C, remains constant for a specific feed this type of deactivation 
reduces to the simple-to-treat independent deactivation of Eq. 12. 
Although the above nth-order expressions are quite simple they are general 
enough to embrace many of the decay equations used to date [see Szepe and 
Levenspiel (1968)l. 
The Rate Equation from Experiment 
Experimental devices for studying deactivating catalysts fall into two classes: 
those which use a batch of solids, and those which use a through flow of solids. 
Figure 21.1 shows some of these devices. 
Batch solids-for slow deactivation 
Plug flow 
8 -+QCL 
for fluid 
Batch for both 
M~xed flow 
Recycle flow 
solid and fluid 
for fluid 
for fluid 
Flow of solids-for fast deactivation 
Solids: - plug flow 
Fluid: - plug flow 
Raining 
solids 
Solids: mixed flow 
Fluid: questionable 
flow pattern 
Figure 21.1 Slow deactivation may use a batch of solids in experimentation; fast 
deactivation requires a flow of solids. 


=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
478 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Because of the ease of experimentation batch-solids devices are much pre- 
ferred; however, they can only be used when deactivation is slow enough (in the 
order of minutes or longer) so that sufficient data on the changing fluid composi- 
tion can be obtained before exhaustion of the catalyst. When deactivation is 
very rapid (in the order of seconds or less) then a flowing-solids system must be 
used. Cracking catalysts whose activity half-lives can be as short as 0.1 second 
fall into this class. 
The method of searching for a rate equation is analogous to that of homoge- 
neous reactions: start with the simplest kinetic form and see if it fits the data. If 
it doesn't, try another kinetic form and so on. The main complication here is 
that we have an extra factor, the activity, to contend with. Nevertheless, the 
strategy is the same; always start by trying to fit the simplest rate expression. 
In the following sections we treat the batch-solids devices in some detail, and 
then briefly consider the flowing-solids system. 
Now the type of batch-solids flowing-fluid reactor that we find convenient 
to use depends on whether the deactivation expression daldt is concentration 
independent or not. When it is concentration independent, any type of batch- 
solids system may be used and can be analyzed simply, but when it is concentration 
dependent, then unless one particular type of reactor is used (that in which CA 
is forced to stay unchanged with time) the analysis of the experimental results 
becomes horrendously awkward and difficult. 
We treat these two classes of experimental devices in turn. 
Batch-Solids: Determining the Rate for Independent Deactivation 
Let us illustrate how to interpret experiments from the various batch-solids 
reactors of Fig. 21.1 and how to manipulate the basic performance equations for 
these reactors by testing the fit for the simplest of equation forms for indepen- 
dent deactivation. 
with 
This represents first-order reaction and first-order deactivation which, in addition, 
is concentration independent. 
Batch-Solids, Batch-Fluid. Here we need to develop an expression relating the 
changing gas concentration with time. Using time as the one independent variable 
throughout the run the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 become 


=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 479 
Integrating Eq. 16 yields 
and for unit initial activity, or a, = 1, this becomes 
a = e - k d t  
Replacing Eq. 18 in Eq. 15 we then find 
and on separation and integration 
c, 
Wk' 
In-=- 
(1 - e - k d t )  
CA 
Vkd 
This expression shows that even at infinite time the concentration of reactant in 
an irreversible reaction does not drop to zero but is governed by the rate of 
reaction and of deactivation, or 
Combining the above two expression and rearranging then yields 
A plot as shown in Fig. 21.2 provides a test for this rate form. 
Figure 21.2 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch-solids, batch-fluid re- 
actor. 


=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
480 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
The batch-batch reactor becomes a practical device when the characteristic 
times for reaction and deactivation are of the same order of magnitude. If they 
are not and if deactivation is much slower, then CA, becomes very low and 
difficult to measure accurately. Fortunately, this ratio can be controlled by the 
experimenter by proper choice of WIV. 
Batch-Solids, Mixed Constant Flow of Fluid. Inserting the rate of Eq. 14a iuto 
the performance expression for mixed flow gives 
and on rearrangement 
In Eq. 24 the activity varies with the chronological time. To eliminate this quantity 
integrate Eq. 14b (see Eq. 18) and insert in Eq. 24. Thus 
Rearranging gives, in more useful form, 
This expression shows how the reactant concentration at the outlet rises with 
time, while the plot of Fig. 21.3 provides the test of this kinetic equation. If the 
Figure 21.3 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and steady- 
state mixed flow of fluids. 


=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 481 
data fall on a straight line then the slope and intercept yield the two rate constants 
of Eq. 14. 
We should mention that this and the succeeding batch-solids derivations are 
based on the pseudo steady-state assumption. This assumes that conditions 
change slowly enough with time for the system to be at steady state at any 
instant. Since a batch of solids can only be used if deactivation is not too rapid 
this assumption is reasonable. 
Batch-Solids, Mixed Changing Flow of Fluid (to keep C, fixed). For steady 
flow in a mixed reactor we have found 
To keep CA constant the flow rate must be slowly changed with time. In fact, it 
must be lowered because the catalyst is deactivating. Hence the variables in this 
situation are r 1  and t. So, on rearranging we have 
Figure 21.4 shows how to test for the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 by this pro- 
cedure. 
Actually there is no particular advantage in using varying flow over constant 
flow when testing for the kinetics of Eq. 14 or any other independent deactivation. 
However, for other deactivation kinetics this reactor system is by far the most 
useful because it allows us to decouple the three factors C, T, and a and study 
them a pair at a time. 
lr kcreax 
in 
w-+,. flow 
~
2
7
 
Ir 
. 
- 
c~~ - c~ 
Intercept = In - 
k'CA 
Figure 21.4 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and chang- 
ing flow of fluid in a mixed reactor so as to 
keep C, constant. 


=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
482 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Figure 21.5 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and steady- 
state plug flow of fluid. 
Batch-Solids, Plug Constant Flow of Fluid. For plug flow the performance 
equation combined with the rate of Eq. 14a becomes 
Integrating and replacing a by the expression of Eq. 18 gives 
which becomes, on rearrangement, 
Figure 21.5 shows how to test for the kinetics of Eq. 14, and how to evaluate 
the rate constants with data from this type of reactor. 
Batch-Solids, Plug Changing Flow of Fluid (to keep CA, 
out fixed). At any instant 
in the plug flow reactor Eq. 29 applies. Thus noting that r1 and t are the two 
variables we obtain, on suitable rearrangement, 
Figure 21.4, with one modification (the intercept given by the last term of Eq. 
31), shows how to test for the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 with this device. 
So far we have illustrated how to use a batch, plug flow or mixed flow of fluid 
to search for the rate constants of a particular rate form, Eq. 14. 


=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 483 
As long as the deactivation is concentration independent, the activity and 
concentration effects can be decoupled and any of the above experimental devices 
will give simple easy-to-interpret results. Thus the above analyses can be extended 
with no difficulty to any reaction order n and any deactivation order d, as long 
as m = 0, or for 
On the other hand, if the deactivation is concentration dependent, or m # 0, 
then the concentration and activity effects do not decouple and analysis becomes 
difficult unless the proper experimental device is used, one deliberately chosen 
so as to decouple these factors. Reactors which keep C, constant by slowing the 
flow rate of feed, as treated above, are such devices. They can be used to find 
the rate constants for the reactions 
as well as for parallel, series, and side-by-side deactivation [see Levenspiel 
(1972, 1996)l. 
How Pore Diffusion Resistance Distorts the Kinetics of Reactions with 
Deactivating Catalysts 
Consider the following rate scheme for reactions on spherical particles 
da 
1 where k'p, = k 
- - 
= kdad 
dt 
For no deactivation but with or without pore diffusion resistance these rate 
expressions become 
where 
& = 1 for no diffusional slowdown 
1 
1 
k '  for strong diffusional 
&=-, 
M,=L 
MT 


=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
484 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
With deactivation, Eq. 34 above becomes 
where 
L = 1 for no diffusional slowdown 
1 
1 
&
=
 
M - L  
for strong diffusional 
MT; 
Td - 
resistance 
Also as time passes, from Eq. 37, 
a=exp(-k,t) 
f o r d = l  
a = [I + (d - l)k,t]ll(l-d) 
for d # 1 
These expressions show that in the regime of strong pore diffusion resistance a 
decreases (see Eq. 39), causing MTd to also decrease. This means that 8 rises 
with time, as shown in Fig. 21.6. However a decreases faster than &rises so the 
reaction rate decreases with time. 
here 
Figure 21.6 Effectiveness factor increases with time as catalyst 
deactivates: batch Slplug flow G. 


=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 485 
Table 21.1 Performance equations for plug flow Glbatch S, with the simple first 
order system of Eq. 14 
No Resistance to Pore Diffusion 
Strong Resistance to Pore Diffusion 
C
~
O
 
Without 
In - 
= k'7' 
CAO kt 7' 
In-=- 
deactivation 
(40) 
CA 
MT 
. (41) 
(Chapters 5, 18) 
(Chapter 18) 
c ~ O  
In - 
= (k'a)~' 
CAO (kla)+ 
In-=- 
With 
c A 
. (42) 
CA 
MTd 
deactivation 
. . (43) 
= k17' ' exp(-kdt) 
- k1 7' 
- - 
. -p(- y) 
MT 
Performance Equations in the Regime of Strong Diffusional Resistance 
There are so many different forms of deactivation rate, it is not worthwhile 
trying to present their performance equations. Let us illustrate what happens 
with just one rate form, the simplest, 
For batch Slplug flow G integration of the various diffusion deactivation regimes 
gives the values in Table 21.1. 
For given k ' ~ ' ,  in other words for given treatment rate, Fig. 21.7 shows that CA 
at the exit rises with time, or that conversion decreases with time. 
Figure 21.7 With deactivation and pore diffusional resistance 
reactor performance decreases with time. 
h 
Eq. 27 
k ' ~ '  
Eq. 42, slope = -kd ... no pore diffusion 
resistance 
kd 
Eq. 43, slope = -- ... strong resistance 
* 
to pore diffusion 
* t 


=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
486 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Comments 
(a) For mixed flow we get equations and charts identical to the above except 
for the following change 
(b) For other reaction orders and deactivation orders similar equations can 
be developed for the above four kinetic regimes. For example, for second- 
order reaction batch Slmixed flow G we have, with Eq. 18.28 
(c) Figure 21.7 for first-order systems shows that the conversion decreases 
more slowly in the presence of strong pore diffusion resistance than in the 
diffusion-free regime. This result should apply generally to all reactor types 
and reaction kinetics. 
INTERPRETING KINETIC DATA IN THE PRESENCE OF 
PORE DIFFUSION RESISTANCE AND DEACTIVATION 
I 
The catalytic decomposition of reactant (A+R) is studied in a packed bed 
reactor filled with 2.4-mm pellets and using a very high recycle rate of product 
gases (assume mixed flow). The results of a long-time run and additional data 
are given below. 
Find the kinetics of reaction and deactivation, both in the diffusion-free and in 
the strong pore diffusion resistance regime. 
Be = 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
I SOLUTION 
t, hr 
XA 
First of all, note that deactivation occurs during the run, so guess or try to fit 
the data with the simplest rate form for such situations, or 
O 
0.75 
0.64 
0.52 
0.39 
ps = 1500 kg/m3cat 
+ = 4000 kg s,m3 


=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 487 
The performance equations for this rate form and mixed flow are analogous to 
those for plug flow, shown in Table 21.1, 
In diffusion-free 
= k'T1a = ktT1e-kdl 
regime 
In strong diffusion 
a =  - 
regime 
(ii) 
see Eq. 38 
If this rate form is correct then for both strong or no diffusion resistance effects 
c*, 
a plot of in (c 
- 1) vs t should give a straight line. Making this tabulation 
and plot, as shown in Fig. E21.1 shows that the above rate form fits the data. 
k 
Intercept = I .  1 
1.2 
0 
0.75 
3 
1.10 
2 
0.64 
1.78 
0.58 
Slope = -0.26 
4 
0.52 
1.08 
0.08 
6 
0.39 
0.64 
-0.45 
0.4 
-0.4 1 
/This 
is a good straight line; hence, 
\ the guessed rate form fits the data. 
Figure E21.1 
Let us next see whether the reactor is operating in the diffusion-free or strong 
diffusion regime. 
Guess No Intrusion of Diffusional Resistances. Then from Eq. (i) we have 
In - 
- 1 = In (k'd) - kdt 
(2 1 
From Fig. E21.1 
m3 
the intercept = 1.1 } thus [ 
kt = 7.5 x 
kgas 
the slope = -0.26 
kd = 0.26 hr-l 


=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
488 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Now check the Thiele modulus to verify that we really are in the diffusion 
resistance free regime. Thus at t = 0 
Unfortunately, this value indicates strong resistance to pore diffusion. This con- 
tradicts our starting assumption, so our original guess was wrong. 
Guess That the Runs Were Made in the Regime of Strong Resistance to Pore 
Diffusion. Then Eq. (ii) becomes 
From Fig. E21.1 we have 
the intercept = 1.1 
the slope = -0.26 
kd = 0.52 hr-l 
From the value for the intercept 
we find 
Check the Thiele modulus at t = 0 
This value of Thiele modulus represents strong pore diffusional resistance. This 
is consistent with our original guess. 
Hence the final rate equations: 
(a) In the diffusion-free regime (for very small d,) with deactivation 
mol 
da 
-rk = 0.27 C,a, - 
. . with . - . - - 
= 0.52 a, hr-I 
kg-s 
dt 


=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
21.3 Design 489 
(b) In the strong pore digusion resistance regime (for large d,) with deacti- 
vation 
-rA = 0.27 C,a& 
... with ... 
- - 
da - 
- 0.52 a 
f 
dt 
combining all gives 
mol 
3 
lo-' CAal", - 
. . 
-,-i = - 
da 
L 
with . . - - 
= 0.52 a, hr-l 
kgas 
dt 
Note: In the strong pore diffusion regime the rate is lower but the catalyst 
deactivates more slowly. Actually, for the catalyst used here if we could have 
been free of diffusional resistances reaction rates would have been 360 times 
as fast as those measured. 
Reflection on this example leaves us with the impression that even with the 
simplest of rate forms the analysis is quite involved. It suggests that it is not 
worthwhile in this general text to try to treat more complicated rate forms. 
21.3 DESIGN 
When reacting fluid flows through a batch of deactivating catalyst the conversion 
drops progressively during the run, and steady state conditions cannot be main- 
tained. If conditions change slowly with time, then the average conversion during 
a run can be found by calculating the steady-state conversion at various times 
and summing over time. In symbols, then, 
When conversion drops too low the run is terminated, the catalyst is either 
discarded or regenerated, and the cycle is repeated. Example 21.2 illustrates this 
type of calculation. 
There are two important and real problems with deactivating catalysts. 
The operational problem: how to best operate a reactor during a run. Since 
temperature is the most important variable affecting reaction and deactivation 
this problem reduces to finding the best temperature progression during the run. 
The regeneration problem: when to stop a run and either discard or regenerate 
the catalyst. This problem is easy to treat once the first problem has been solved 
for a range of run times and final catalyst activities. (Note: each pair of values 
for time and final activity yields the corresponding mean conversion.) 


=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
490 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
XA decreases with time as 
Constant flow 
catalyst deactivates. 
Thus FR decreases with time 
Isothermal 
XA and composition stay 
Flow decreases with 
constant. However, FR 
time so as to keep 
decreases with time. 
XA constant. 
XA and FR are kept 
Constant molar 
4 
@ 
constant. 
flow 
Temperature is boosted 
to keep XA constant. 
Figure 21.8 Three possible reactor policies for a batch of deactivat- 
ing catalyst. 
The operational problem has been solved analytically for a rather general 
family of kinetic equations: 
Note the restriction here, that deactivation is concentration independent. 
Consider the operational problem. For rather slow deactivation we can use a 
batch of catalyst with a choice of running the reactor in one of three ways, as 
shown in Fig. 21.8. Whatever policy is chosen the performance equations for the 
rates of Eqs. 41 and 42 are obtained by solving the following expressions: 
with 
The integrated performance equations take on a whole host of forms 
for plug or mixed flow 
for n = 1,2, . . . 
for d = 0, 1, 2, 3 
Some of these are given in Chapter 32 of Levenspiel (1996). We do not present 
them here. 
In general we can evaluate zA 
b solving Eq. 40 with Eqs. 43 and 44. Referring 
to Fig. 21.8 we see that for case 6 a decreases with time, and so does XA. For 


=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
21.3 Design 491 
case a 
a decreases with time so the feed rate must also be lowered so that at 
any time 
. , ,  
a 
AO, inihal 
Nearly always we find that case @ is optimum. Here Eq. 43 becomes 
constant 
constant 
so klaCA, should remain constant as the temperature is raised. This means that 
in the regime of no pore diffusion resistance we must change T with time such that 
ideal gases with 
nth-order reactions 
In the regime of strong resistance to pore diffusion we must change T with time 
such that 
klaCBe = constant . - . for liquids 
ideal gases and 
nth-order reactions 
Discussion 
The overall problem is finding which policy @ a 
@ is best. We have the 
following findings: 
(a) For the longest run time for given FA and for any a,,,, if the deactivation 
is very temperature sensitive compared to reaction, then the optimal policy 
is a rising temperature with time so as to keep the conversion from the 
reactor unchanged, thus use policy @, ending the run at the maximum 
allowable temperature P, 
as shown in Fig. 21.9, see Szepe (1966, 1968, 
1971). 
(b) If deactivation is less temperature sensitive than is the reaction use policy 
@ or a 
whichever is more convenient, but make the run at the maximum 
allowable temperature T*. 
(c) For deactivations which are concentration dependent the catalyst activity 
will vary with position in the reactor. The optimum requires that the 
temperature vary with position along the reactor as well as with time. This 
is a difficult situation to analyze. 


=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
492 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
/- 
Maximum allowable temperature 
Constant XA 
I 
1 
trun 
trun 
Starting T 
Correct 
Starting T 
is too low 
starting T 
is too high 
(a) 
(b) 
(4 
Figure 21.9 These sketches show the correct and incorrect starting temperatures for policy @. 
(d) For catalysts which deactivate very rapidly packed bed reactors are imprac- 
tical, and one has to use solid-flow systems. We do not treat these here. 
Such systems are treated in Chapter 33 of Levenspiel (1996). 
DEACTIVATION IN A PACKED BED REACTOR 
We plan to run an isomerization of A to R in a packed bed reactor (pure A 
feed, FA, = 5 kmollhr, W = 1-ton catalyst, T = 3 atm, T = 730 K). The catalyst 
deactivates so we plan to make 120 day runs, then regenerate the catalyst. 
(a) Plot conversion and activity versus time for the run 
(b) find & for the 120 day run 
The rate of reaction with CA in mol/m3 is described by 
mol A 
= 0.2 Cia kg cat. hr 
I 
and the rate of deactivation is given by 
I 
(a) . . . --- 
da - 8.3125 X lo-', 
day-' 
dt 
This expression represents poisoning by a feed impurity. 
da 
(b) . . . - - 
= 10-3(CA + C,)a, 
day-l 
dt 
This represents poisoning by both reactant and by product, thus pore 
diffusion resistance does not influence the deactivation rate. 
(c). . . - - -  
da - 3.325 a', 
day-l 
dt 
This represents fairly strong pore diffusion resistance. 
da 
( d ) .  . . - - -  
dt - 666.5 a3, 
day-' 
This represents very strong pore diffusion resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
21.3 Design 493 
SOLUTION 
In general for parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) we can write 
mol A 
- r i  = 0.2 Cia kg cat. hr 
PAO - 
3 atm 
mol 
CAo=-- 
= 50- 
m3. atm 
m3 
RT 
(82.06 x - 
mol . K 
(1000 kg) (so 2) 
kg. hr 
= 10- m3 
(5000 e) 
or on rearranging 
Let us now replace the activity term in Eq. (i). 
Part (a) 
or 
a = 1 - 8.3125 X 
t 
(ii) 
Replacing Eq. (ii) in Eq. (i) and evaluating XA at various values of t gives the 
topmost curve shown in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (b) Separating and integrating - - 
= 10-3(CA + C,)a gives 
dt 


=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
494 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
I 
4 
Time, days 
Figure E21.2 Decrease in conversion as a function of time for various 
deactivation orders. 
Replacing Eq. (iii) in Eq. (i) and evaluating X, at various t values gives the 
corresponding curve in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (c) Separating and integrating - - 
= 3.325 a2 gives 
dt 
Again, replacing Eq. (iv) in (i) gives the corresponding curve in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (d) Separating and integrating -- = 666.5 a3 gives 
dt 
1 
Combining Eq. (v) in (i) gives the lowest curve shown in Fig. E21.2. 


=== PDF PAGE 127 ===
Problems 495 
From Fig. E21.2 we find by graphical integration that for the 120-day period, 
XA ,,,,,, = 0.99, X, ,, 
= 0.20 for 
d = 0 the mean conversion 
FA 
= 0.96 
d = 1 the mean conversion 
X, = 0.73 
d = 2 the mean conversion 
FA 
= 0.40 
d = 3 the mean conversion 
XA = 0.30 
I 
It also clearly shows how different is the progress of the reaction with the different 
orders of deactivation. 
REFERENCES 
Levenspiel, O., J. Catal., 25, 265 (1972). 
, 
Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Szepe, S., Ph.D. Thesis, Illinois Institute of Technology, 1966; also see Szepe, S., and 0 .  
Levenspiel, Chem. Eng. Sci., 23, 881 (1968); "Catalyst Deactivation," p. 265, Fourth 
European Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering, Brussels, September 1968, 
Pergamon, London, 1971. 
PROBLEMS 
The kinetics of a particular catalytic reaction A + R are studied at temperature 
T in a basket reactor (batch-solids and mixed flow of gas) in which the gas 
composition is kept unchanged, despite deactivation of the catalyst. What can 
you say about the rates of reaction and deactivation from the results of the 
following runs? Note, to keep the gas concentration in the reactor unchanged 
the flow rate of reactant had to be lowered to about 5% of the initial value. 
21.1. . . . Run 1 
CAo = 1 mollliter 
t, time from start of run, hr 
0 1 2 
3 
XA = 0.5 
rl, gm cat. minlliter 
1 
1 e 
e2 e3 
Run 2 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.667 
rl, gm cat. minlliter l
o
l
z
3
 
2 
2e 
2e2 2e3 
21.2. . . . Run 1 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.5 
rl, gm.min/liter 


=== PDF PAGE 128 ===
496 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Run 2 
C, 
= 20 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.8 
TI, gm.min/liter 
21.3. In an automobile's catalytic converter, CO and hydrocarbons present in 
the exhaust gases are oxidized. Unfortunately the effectiveness of these 
units decreases with use. The phenomenon was studied by Summers and 
Hegedus in J. Catalysis, 51, 185 (1978) by means of an accelerated aging 
test on a palladium impregnated porous pellet packed bed converter. 
From the reported data on hydrocarbon conversion shown below, develop 
an expression to represent the deactivation rate of this catalyst. 
This problem was prepared by Dennis Timberlake. 
21.4. A recycle reactor with very high recycle ratio is used to study the kinetics 
of a particular irreversible catalytic reaction, A --+ R. For a constant flow 
rate of feed (7' = 2 kg. seclliter) the following data are obtained: 
Time after start of operation, hr 
1 
2 
4 
XA 
1 
0.889 
0.865 
0.804 
The progressive drop in conversion suggests that the catalyst deactivates 
with use. Find rate equations for the reaction and for the deactivation 
which fit these data. 
21.5. The reversible catalytic reaction 
proceeds with decaying catalyst in a batch reactor (batch-solids, batch- 
fluid). What can you say of the kinetics of reaction and deactivation from 
the following data: 
21.6. The following data on an irreversible reaction are obtained with decaying 
catalyst in a batch reactor (batch-solids, batch-fluid) What can you say 
about the kinetics 
21.7. With fresh catalyst the packed bed reactor is run at 600K. Four weeks 
later when the temperature reaches 800K the reactor is shut down to 
reactivate the catalyst. In addition, at any instant the reactor is isothermal. 


=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
Problems 497 
Assuming optimal operations what is the activity of the catalyst at the 
time of reactivation. 
Data: The rate of reaction with fresh catalyst is 
The rate of deactivation is unknown. 
Our reaction A - t R  proceeds isothermally in a packed bed of large, 
slowly deactivating catalyst particles and is performing well in the strong 
pore diffusion regime. With fresh pellets conversion is 88%; however, 
after 250 days conversion drops to 64%. How long can we run the reactor 
before conversion drops to 
It has been suggested that we replace these large particles with very small 
particles so as to operate wholly in the diffusion-free regime and thus use 
less catalyst for the same conversions. How long a run time can we expect 
before the conversion drops from 88% to 64% if the catalyst is used in 
21.9. . . . a packed bed reactor? 
21.10. . . . a fluidized solids reactor (assume mixed flow of fluid)? 
21.11. Under conditions of strong pore diffusion the reaction A --+ R proceeds 
at 700°C on a slowly deactivating catalyst by a first-order rate 
-ra = 0.030 CAa, 
[mollgm min] 
Deactivation is caused by strong absorption of unavoidable and irremov- 
able trace impurities in the feed, giving third-order deactivation kinetics, 
or 
We plan to feed a packed bed reactor (W = 10 kg) with u = 100 liters1 
min of fresh A at 8 atm and 700°C until the catalyst activity drops to 10% 
of the fresh catalyst, then regenerate the catalyst and repeat the cycle, 
(a) What is the run time for this operation? 
(b) What is the mean conversion for the run? 
21.12. In catalytic dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons the catalyst activity decays 
with use because of carbon deposition on the active surfaces. Let us study 
this process in a specific system. 


=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
498 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
A gaseous feed (10% C, HI, - 90% inerts, ?T = 1 atm, T = 555°C) flows 
(7' = 1.1 kg. hr/m3) through a packed bed of alumina-chromia catalyst. 
The butane decomposes by a first-order reaction 
C,HIo4 C,H,-carbon 
\ 
other gases 
and the behavior with time is as follows: 
Examination of the 0.55-mm pellets shows the same extent of carbon 
deposition at the entrance and the exit of the reactor, suggesting concentra- 
tion independent deactivation. Develop rate equations for reaction and 
deactivation. 
This problem was devised from the information given by Kunugita et 
al., J. Chem. Eng. (Japan), 2, 75 (1969). 
The enzyme catalase effectively decomposes hydrogen peroxide 
catalase 
1 
H202 - 
H20 + - 0, 
2 
and the kinetics of this reaction are to be evaluated from an experiment 
in which dilute H202 flows through a packed bed of kieselguhr particles 
impregnated with immobilized enzyme. 
From the following data, reported by Krishnaswamy and Kitterell, 
AZChE J., 28, 273 (1982), develop rate expressions to represent this 
decomposition, both in the diffusion free regime and in the strong pore 
diffusion regime, for the catalyst at hand. Note that the conversion de- 
creases with time in all runs showing that the catalyst deactivates with use. 
21.13. . . . run E (modified) 
Elapsed Time, hr 
XA 
0 
1.25 
r1 = 4100 kg cat. s/m3 
2.0 
zp = 72 2 
3.0 
p, = 630 kg/m3 cat 
4.25 
Se = 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 


=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
Problems 499 
21.14. . . . run B 
T' = 4560 kg cat. s/m3 
- 
d, = 1.45 X 10-3m 
p, = 630 kg/m3 cat 
9, 
= 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
Elapsed Time, hr 
XA 
0.25 
0.57 
1 .O 
0.475 
2.0 
0.39 
3.0 
0.30 
4.0 
0.23 
5.0 
0.186 
6.0 
0.14 
7.0 
0.115 
21.15. At 730K the isomerization of A to R (rearrangement of atoms in the 
molecule) proceeds on a slowly deactivating catalyst with a second-order 
rate 
-ri = k'Cia = 200 Cia, [mol Alhr . gm cat] 
Since reactant and product molecules are similar in structure, deactivation 
is caused by both A and R. With diffusional effects absent, the rate of 
deactivation is found to be 
We plan to operate a packed bed reactor containing W = 1 metric ton 
of catalyst for 12 days using a steady feed of pure A, FA, = 5 kmollhr at 
730 K and 3 atm (CAo = 0.05 mollliter). 
(a) First evaluate -da/dt, d ,  and then the general expression for 1 - XA. 
(b) What is the conversion at the start of the run? 
(c) What is the conversion at the end of the run? 
(d) What is the average conversion over the 12-day run? 


=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
Chapter 22 
G/L Reactions on Solid 
Catalysts: Trickle Beds, Slurry 
Reactors, and Three-Phase 
Fluidized Beds 
These multiphase reactions are of the type 
dissolve 
on solid 
and they can be run in a number of ways, as shown in Fig. 22.1. The packed bed 
contactors use large solid particles, the slurry reactors very fine suspended solids, 
while the fluidized bed can use either depending on the flow rates. 
Flow pattern: Overall, all other things equal (which they are not) countercur- 
rent plug flow is the most desirable flow pattern while the worst of all in terms 
of driving forces is mixedlmixed flow. 
22.1 THE GENERAL RATE EQUATION 
Consider the following reaction and stoichiometry 
on catalyst 
A(g -+ 1) + bB(1) =products 
. 
- ut - ,ye c 
-r; 
= -~;;'/b. . 
Y A -  
A A 
B 
mol A/m3 cat. s 
where 
-r;= 
klCACB 
kg= k;;'lb. . .mf/molB.m3cat.s 


=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
22.1 The General Rate Equation 501 
Trickle 
High velocity 
Packed or 
bed 
flow. L is 
fixed bed: 
blown through 
by the gas. 
Suspended 
particles: 
Agitated slurry 
reactor 
(suspended 
fine solids) 
'L Rising 
bubbles 
/ Sd:91i$T 
through L 
containing fine 
suspended 
solids). 
@ 
Three-phase fluidized bed. these vary widely in G/L 
ratio from G bubbling through an L slurry to a 
G fluidized bed of damp particles. 
Figure 22.1 Various ways of running GIL reactions catalyzed by solids. 
Gas reactant must first dissolve in the L, then both reactants must diffuse or 
move to the catalyst surface for reaction to occur. Thus the resistance to transfer 
across the GIL interface and then to the surface of solid both enter the general 
rate expression. 
To develop the rate equation, let us draw on the two-film theory, and let us 
use the following nomenclature: 
PA , Henry's law constant [Pa 
m311moll 
Typical element 
gas-liquid interfacial area 
of volume contain 
a. = 
volume of reactor 
G, 
L, and S. 
, a, = external surface of particles 
for 
6fs 
volume of reactor 
spheres d, 
volume Of particles, called solid loading 
= volume of reactor 
volume Of liquid called liquid holdup 
.' = volume of reactor' 


=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
502 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions o n  Solid Catalysts 
Gas fllm coeff~cient 
Liquid fllm coef 
coefflc~ents L?OAe, EDs, [m31/m cat . sl 
Centerl~ne of pellet 
Figure 22.2 Sketch showing the resistances involved in the GIL reaction on a catalyst 
surface. 
Graphically we show the resistances as in Fig. 22.2. We can then write the 
following general rate equations: 
For A: 
1 
these rates 
with rate constant (kAmCB) 
Henry's law constant 
HA = PA/ CA 
For B: 
k -Y; 
= 
1 
+ 
1 
C B ~  
for the first order reaction of B 
with rate constant (kgcA) 
Now either Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 should give the rate of reaction. Unhappily, even 
with all the system parameters known (k, a, f, etc.) we still cannot solve these 
expressions without trial and error because rB 
is not known in Eq. 2 and FA is 
not known in Eq. 3. However, we usually encounter either of two simplifying 
extremes, which are very useful. 
Extreme 1: CBl B CAP In systems with pure liquid B and slightly soluble gas 
A we can take 
- 
CBs = CB,within 
pellet = CBr - . . same value everywhere 


=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 503 
With C, constant the reaction becomes first order with respect to A overall and 
the above rate expressions with their required trial and error all reduce to one 
directly solvable expression 
Lfirst-order 
rate 
constant for A 
Extreme 2: CBl G CAI. In systems with dilute liquid reactant B, highly soluble 
A, and high pressure, we can take 
- . throughout the reactor 
CAI = X, 
The rate then becomes first order with respect to B and reduces to 
-rg = 
1 
+ 
1 
CBl 
mol ~ / r n ~  
reactom 
& 
first-order rate constant which 
is used to calculate gB 
How to Test Whether these Extremes Apply, and Other Comments 
(a) By the unequal signs 
or G we mean two or three times as large. 
(b) More generally compare the rates calculated from Eqs. 4 and 5 and use 
the smaller one. Thus, 
if r&, 4 r&, , , then C,, is in excess and extreme 1 applies. 
if r &, , 
a r&, 5, then Eq. 5 gives the rate of reaction. 
(c) Nearly always does one or other of the extremes apply. 
22.2 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR AN EXCESS OF B 
All types of contactors-trickle 
beds, slurry reactors, and fluidized beds-can 
be treated at the same time. What is important is to recognize the flow patterns 
of the contacting phases and which component, A or B, is in excess. First consider 
an excess of B. Here the flow pattern of liquid is not important. We only have 
to consider the flow pattern of the gas phase. So we have the following cases. 


=== PDF PAGE 136 ===


=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 505 
22.4, we can write 
where 
pA(rir, - pAO) dilute pArO dilute 
pA 
1 - X A =  
-- 
- 
P A O ( ~  - P A )  
only P A O ~  
a = const. PAO 
and 
n(rO - pAO) dpA dilute rO dpA dilute 
dpA 
-dXA = 
-- 
P A O ( ~  - P A ) ~  
pAOr a = const. pAo 
Overall, around the whole reactor 
Mixed Flow GIBatch L (excess of B) 
With throughflow of L its composition stays roughly constant when B is in excess. 
However, with a batch of L its composition slowly changes with time as B is 
being used up, but B is roughly constant in the reactor at any time, as shown in 
Fig. 22.5. Here the material balance at any time t becomes 
l ncreases 
with time 
XA. exit! PA 
x A , e x i t , ~ a t t = ~ } /  
' '  
XA, exit, f at t = tf 
Batch volume V, 
CEO at t = 0 
CBf at t = tf 
Figure 22.5 Gas bubbles through a batch of liquid, B in 
excess. 


=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
506 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
1 
- 
(-r;) 
ith Eq. 12 the area 
or 
1 
- 
XA, exit 
Figure 22.6 Evaluation of the reaction 
time for a batch of liquid. 
The general procedure for finding the processing time is as follows: 
Then from I1 and 111. or I and I1 solve for t 
as shown in Fig. 22.6. 
From I and I1 
calculate 
XA, 
exit, o 
- 
- 
XA, 
exit, f 
Pick a number 
of CB values 
c~~ 
- 
- 
C B ~  
Plug Flow GIBatch L (excess of B) 
From I11 
calculate 
(-TA)O 
- 
- 
(-rAIf 
As with the previous case, CB changes slowly with time; however, any element 
of gas sees the same CB as it flows through the reactor, as shown in Fig. 22.7. 
Increases 
[with 
time 
with time 
Consider a slice 
-Same CB everywhere. 
It can be circulated if 
wanted. However CB 
decreases with time 
as B is used up 
Figure 22.7 Plug flow of gas through a batch of 
liquid. 


=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 507 
Consider a slice of contactor in a short time interval in which CB is practically 
unchanged. Then a material balance gives 
FAO dXA = (-r'f)dVr 
(13) 
Integrating gives the exit conversion of A 
Considering B we may now write 
and on integrating we find the processing time to be 
The procedure is as follows: 
Then solve Eq. 15 graphically to find the time as shown in Fig. 22.8. 
Choose CB 
CBO 
- 
- 
c ~ f  
C ~ ,  
fixed 
C ~ O  
Solve Eq. 14 
to Give XA, 
XA, exit (t = 0) 
- 
- 
XA, exit (at t )  
Figure 22.8 Evaluation of the reac- 
tion time in a batch L reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
508 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
Batch 
L 
L 
Figure 22.9 Pure gaseous A can be recompressed and recycled. 
Special Case of Pure Gaseous A (excess of B) 
One often encounters this situation, especially in hydrogenations. Here one 
usually recycles the gas, in which case pA and CA stay unchanged; hence, the 
preceding equations for both batch and flow systems simplify enormously, see 
Fig. 22.9. When solving problems, it is suggested that one write down the basic 
material balances and then carefully see what simplifications apply . . . is pA 
constant? . . . and so on. 
Comments The rate expressions used so far have been first order with respect 
to A and first order with respect to B. But how do we deal with more general 
rate forms, for example: 
To be able to combine the chemical step with the mass transfer steps in simple 
fashion, we must replace the above awkward rate equation with a first-order 
approximation, as follows: 
-ri 
= kic: C? + -'/ = [(k '"Cm)C2 -I] cA 
(17) 
mean values "I; 
at 
locations where 
reaction occurs 
This approach is not completely satisfactory, but it is the best we can do. Thus, 
instead of Eq. 4, the rate form to be used in all the performance expressions 
will be 


=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
22.4 Which Kind of Contactor to Use 509 
22.3 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR AN EXCESS OF A 
Here the flow pattern of gas is of no concern. All we need to worry about is the 
flow pattern of liquid. 
Plug Flow LIAny Flow G (tower and packed bed operations) 
Making the material balances gives on integration 
L.- 
given by Eq. s 
Mixed Flow LIAny Flow G (tank operations of all types) 
Here the performance equation is simply 
( 
given by Eq. 5 
Batch LIAny Flow G 
Noting that C, = constant throughout time (because it is in excess), the perfor- 
mance equation for B becomes 
22.4 WHICH KIND OF CONTACTOR TO USE 
The selection of a good contactor depends on 
* where the controlling resistance lies in the rate expression, 
the advantages of one contacting pattern over another, and 
the difference in auxiliary equipment needed. 
The overall economics which accounts for these three factors will determine 
which set up and reactor type is best. Let us briefly look at these factors in turn. 


=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
510 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
The Rate: We should favor the contactor which favors the weakest step in the 
rate. For example, 
if the main resistance lies in the GIL film, use a contactor with large interfacial 
surface area. 
if the resistance lies at the LIS boundary, use a large exterior surface of 
solid, thus large f, or small particles. 
if the resistance to pore diffusion intrudes, use tiny particles. 
From prediction we can find the weakest step by inserting all transfer coeffi- 
cients (kg, k,, . . .) and system parameters (a,, a,, . . .) into the rate equation 
and then see which resistance term dominates. Unfortunately, the values for 
these quantities usually are not well known. 
From experiment, we can change one or another factor in the rate expression; 
for example, 
solid loading (this changes f, alone, hence, only changes the last resistance 
term in the rate expression) 
size of catalyst particle (affects both Band a,) 
intensity of agitation of the liquid (affects the mass transfer terms in the rate) 
TIT, CB,PA. 
This should tell which factor strongly affects the rate and which does not. 
Boosting the weakest step in the rate by a proper choice of particle size, solid 
loading and reactor type can strongly affect the overall economics of the process. 
Contacting: Plug flow of the limiting component, the one which is not in excess, 
is certainly better than mixed flow. However, except for very high conversions 
this factor is of minor importance. 
Supporting equipment: Slurry reactors can use very fine catalyst particles, and 
this can lead to problems of separating catalyst from liquid. Trickle beds don't 
have this problem, and this is the big advantage of trickle beds. Unfortunately, 
these large particles in trickle beds mean much lower reaction rates. With regard 
to rate, the trickle bed can only hold its own 
for very slow reactions on porous solids where pore diffusion limitations do 
not appear, even for large particles and 
for very fast reactions on nonporous catalyst-coated particles. 
Overall, the trickle bed is simpler, the slurry reactor usually has a higher rate, 
and the fluidized bed is somewhere in between. 
22.5 APPLICATIONS 
Here is a short list of applications of these reactors. 
* The catalytic hydrogenation of petroleum fractions to remove sulfur impuri- 
ties. Hydrogen is very soluble in the liquid; high pressure is used while the 
impurity is present in the liquid in low concentration. All these factors tend 
to lead to extreme 2 (excess of A). 


=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
22.5 Applications 511 
The catalytic oxidation of liquid hydrocarbons with air or oxygen. Since 
oxygen is not very soluble in the liquid, while the hydrocarbon could well 
be present in high concentration we could end up in extreme 1 (excess of B). 
The removal of dissolved organics from industrial waste water by catalytic 
oxidation as an alternative to biooxidation. Here oxygen is not very soluble 
in water, but the organic waste is also present in low concentration. It is 
therefore not clear in what regime the kinetics lie. The catalytic oxidation 
of phenol is an example of such an operation. 
0 The removal of airborne pollutants by adsorption and/or reaction. These 
operations usually lead to extreme 1 (excess of B). 
The illustrative examples and many of the problems which follow are adapted 
from or are extensions of problems prepared by Ramachandran and Choud- 
hary (1980). 
HYDROGENATION OF ACETONE IN A PACKED 
BUBBLE COLUMN 
Aqueous acetone (C,, = 1000 mol/m3 1, v, = 
m3 11s) and hydrogen (1 atm, 
v, = 0.04 m3 gls, HA = 36845 Pa.m3 Ilmol) are fed to the bottom of a long, 
slender column (5-m high, 0.1-m2 cross section) packed with porous Raney nickel 
catalyst (d, = 5 x 
m cat, p, = 4500 kg/m3 cat, f, = 0.6, ge = 8 X 10-lo m3 
Ilm cat. s) and kept at 14"C, as shown in Fig. E22.1. At these conditions acetone 
is hydrogenated to propanol according to the reaction 
on 
H, (g -1) + CH3COCH3(I) cataly;t CH3CHOHCH3 
-- 
---------- 
(A) 
(B) 
I 
with rate given by 
What will be the conversion of acetone in this unit? 
Additional Data 
The mass transfer rate constants are estimated to be 
the sum of the gas + liquid film conductances 


=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
5u 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
I 
I 
9, 
= 8 x 10-lo m31/m cat. s 
5 m 
(of l ~ q u ~ d  
in porus catalyst) 
-ri = rk = k'~;'*, mollkg cat . 
s 
k' = 2.35 X 
(rn31/kgcat . 
s) . (mol1m~1)~'~ 
..... 
pAO 
= 1 atm 
Hydrogen 
CBO = 100 rnol/rn31 
v, = 0.04 m3& 
Figure E22.1 
SOLUTION 
Before rushing to our equations to do the appropriate integrations needed for 
plug flow, let us consider the situation 
CBo = 1000 while CA is given by Henry's law as 
Comparing values shows that C, 9 CA; hence, we are in extreme 1 (excess 
of B). 
Next, we are dealing with pure hydrogen; thus, pA is constant throughout 
the packed column. And since the rate is only dependent on CA and not 
on CB, this means that the rate of reaction is constant throughout the 
column. 


=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
22.5 Applications 513 
Let us next look at the rate. From Eq. 18.28 we have for a half order reaction 
Replacing all known values into Eq. 18 gives 
= 0.0317 mol/m3 r . s 
Next, to the material balance of Eq. 11. With constant rate this becomes 
(not particularly 
use this term in which 
useful 
Fso = v,CBo = 
(1000) = 0.1 molls 
Thus on rearranging 
= 0.158, or 16% conversion 
HYDROGENATION OF A BATCH OF BUTYNEDIOL IN A 
SLURRY REACTOR 
I 
Hydrogen gas is bubbled into an agitated tank (V, = 2 m3r) containing liquid 
butynediol (CBQ = 2500 mol/m3 1) plus a dilute suspension of palladium-impreg- 
nated porous catalyst pellets (d, = 5 X 
m cat, p, = 1450 kg/m3 cat, ge = 
5 x 10-lo m3 Urn cat .s, f, = 0.0055). Hydrogen dissolves in the liquid (HA = 


=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
514 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
Unused H2 is 
recompressed and 
Butynediol --t butenediol 
Porous catalyst 
d, = 50 prn 
p, = 1450 kg/rn3 
9, 
= 5 x 10-lo m31/m cat. s 
f, = 0.0055 
Find t for 90% conversion to butenediol 
Figure E22.2~ 
148 000 Pa.m3 llmol) and reacts with the butynediol on the catalyst surface as 
follows (see Fig. E22.2~): 
on 
H, (g + 1) + butynediol(1) - 
butynediol 
-- 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
and at 35°C 
-,a 
= klCACB 
and 
k' = 5 x 
m6 llkg am01 cat s 
Unused hydrogen is recompressed and recirculated, and the whole operation 
takes place at 1.46 atm and 35°C. 
Find out how long it will take for 90% conversion of reactant. 
I 
Additional Data 
I 
The mass transfer rates are given as 
I 
the sum of the gas and liquid films 
I SOLUTION 
First compare CA and CB: 
PA 
1.46(101 325) = 10 mol/m3 1 
1 
Both at the beginning and 
c A =  =-= 
HA 
148 000 
at the end of the batch run 
CB + CA; therefore, the 
CBo = 2500 and CBf = 250 mol/m3 I 
system is in extreme 1. 


=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
22.5 Applications 515 
Although C, stays constant throughout the batch run, CB does not, so we will 
have a changing rate with time and with CB. Therefore, let us evaluate the rate 
at any particular value of CB. 
therefore, 
and 
Replacing in the rate expression of Eq. 18 gives 
(ii) 
Choose a 
Number of 
MT from 
8, from 
- r,"' from 
CB Values 
Eq. 6) 
Eq. 18.6 
Eq. (ii) 
I/(-r,"') 
2500 
5 
0.19 
0.8105 
1.23 
1000 
3.16 
0.29 
0.6367 
1.57 
250 
1.58 
0.5 
0.3687 
2.71 
Now from Eq. 12 the reaction time is given by 
With b = 1 and Vl = V,, making the plot of Fig. E22.2b, and taking the area 
under the curve gives 
t = 3460 s, or 58 min 


=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
516 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
td 
Data points from the table 
Figure E22.2b 
REFERENCE 
Ramachandran, P. A., and Choudry, V. R., Chem. Eng., p. 74 (December 1, 1980). 
PROBLEMS 
22.1. Trickle bed oxidation. Dilute aqueous ethanol (about 2-3%) is oxidized 
to acetic acid by the action of pure oxygen at 10 atm in a trickle bed reactor 
packed with palladium-alumina catalyst pellets and kept at 30°C. According 
to Sato et al., Proc. First Pacific Chem. Eng. Congress, Kyoto, p. 197,1972, 
the reaction proceeds as follows: 
on 
02(g -+I) + CH3CH20H(I) - 
CH3COOH(I) + H20 
------- ---------- 
(A) 
(B) 
with rate 
Find the fractional conversion of ethanol to acetic acid if gas and liquid 
are fed to the top of a reactor in the following system: 
Gas stream: 
vg = 0.01 m3/s, HA = 86 000 Pa-m3/mol 
Liquid stream: v, = 2 X 
m3/s, CBo = 400 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
5 m high, 
0.1 m2 cross section, f, = 0.58 
Catalyst: 
d, = 5 mm, 
p, = 1800 kg/m3 
Be = 4.16 x 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
Kinetics: 
kAga, = 3 x 
mol/m3. Pa. s, 
kA,ai = 0.02 s-l 
k,, = 3.86 x 
m/s 


=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
Problems 517 
22.2. Slurry column oxidation. Instead of using a trickle bed reactor for ethanol 
oxidation (see previous problem), let us consider using a slurry reactor. 
For this type of unit 
Take all flows and other values from the previous problem, and then find 
the expected fractional conversion of ethanol in this reactor. 
22.3. Slurry tank hydrogenation. Predict the conversion of glucose to sorbitol 
in a stirred slurry reactor using pure hydrogen gas at 200 atm and 150°C. 
The catalyst used is porous Raney nickel, and under these conditions 
Brahme and Doraiswamy, IEC/PDD, 15,130 (1976) report that the reaction 
proceeds as follows: 
solid 
H2(g + 1) + glucose, C~HI~O,(~) 
c;d;llg;t sorbitol, C6H1406(1) 
(A) 
(B) 
with 
Data: 
Gas stream: 
u, = 0.2 m3/s, HA = 277 600 Pa. m3/mol 
Liquid stream: v, = 0.01 m3/s, C, = 2000 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
V, = 2 m3, f, = 0.056 
Catalyst: 
dp = 10 pm, ps = 8900 kg/m3, gk = 2 X 
m3/m cat.s 
Kinetics: 
(kA,ai),+, = 0.05 s-', 
kAc = 
rnls 
22.4. Multistage bubble column hydrogenation. In the previous problem, conver- 
sion to sorbitol is not as high as desired so let us consider an alternative 
design, one which uses an upflow of gas and liquid through a long, narrow 
multistage column 0.25 m2 in cross section and 8 m high containing sus- 
pended solids (d, = 
m and f, = 0.4). What will be the conversion with 
this arrangement? 
Data: (k,,~,),,~ = 0.025 s-', 
k, 
= 
m/s 
All other values are unchanged from the previous problem. 
22.5. Three-phase fluidized bed hydrogenation. Aniline is to be hydrogenated 
in a three-phase fluidized bed of porous clay particles impregnated with 
nickel catalyst. The well-agitated batch of liquid is kept at 130°C by heat 
exchanger tubes passing through the fluidized bed, and by bubbling hydro- 


=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
518 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions o n  Solid Catalysts 
gen vigorously and at a high rate through the bed at 1 atm. According to 
Govindarao and Murthy, J. Appl. Chem. Biotechnol. 25, 196 (19751, at 
these conditions reaction proceeds as follows: 
Ni 
3H2(g -1) 
f 2 C&5NH2(1) ..t.ly;t C6HllNHC&5 + NH; 
- - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
cyclohexyl-aniline 
with rate 
-rL = krCA, 
k' = 0.05 m3/kg cat. s 
Find the time needed for 90% conversion of this batch of aniline. 
Data: 
Gas stream: 
pure H2 at 1 atm, HA = 28 500 Pa. m3/mol 
Batch of liquid: C, = 1097 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
f, = 0.10, 
= 0.65, f, = 0.25 
Catalyst: 
d, = 300 pm, 
p, = 750 kg/m3 
Be = 8.35 X 10-lo m3/m cat as 
Kinetics: 
(kA,ai),+, = 0.04 s-l, 
k, 
= 
m/s 
Assume that the fraction of NH, in the gas stream is very small at any time. 
22.6. Bubble column hydrogenation. Consider a different design to effect the 
hydrogenation of the previous problem, one which uses a long, narrow 
bubble column of semisuspended 3-mm catalyst particles (f, = 0.4, f, = 
0.5, fg = 0.1). The batch of liquid aniline is circulated through an external 
heat exchanger (volume of liquid in the loop outside the reactor equals 
the total volume of the reactor), and hydrogen is bubbled through the 
column. Find the time needed for 90% conversion of aniline in this unit. 
All other values not mentioned here remain unchanged from the previ- 
ous problem. 
22.7. Trickle bed gas absorber-reactor. Sulfur dioxide is to be removed from a 
gas by passing the gas and water through a bed of highly porous activated 
carbon kept at 25°C. In this system sulfur dioxide and oxygen dissolve in 
water and react on the solid to give sulfur trioxide, as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
Problems 519 
where 
Find the fraction of sulfur dioxide removed from a gas stream under the 
following conditions: 
Gas stream: 
v, = 0.01 m3/s, n = 101 325 Pa 
entering SO, = 0.2%, H = 380 000 Pa. m3/mol 
entering 0, = 21%, H = 87 000 Pa. m3/mol 
Liquid stream: 
vl = 2 X 
m3/s 
Reactor: 
2 m high, 
0.1 m2 cross section, f, = 0.6 
Catalyst: 
d, = 5 mm, 
p, = 850 kg/m3 
CBe = 5.35 x 10-lo m3/m s - s 
Kinetics: 
(kiai),+, 
= 0.01 s-', 
kc = 
m/s 
22.8. Hydrogenation in a slurry reactor. The batch hydrogenation of Example 
22.2 takes just about an hour to run. Let us suppose that in practical 
operations we can run eight batches of fluid per day in this unit. Thus, in 
the long run a batch of fluid is processed every three hours. 
Another way of running this reaction is to feed the agitated reactor 
continuously at such a rate that we get 90% conversion of butynediol. How 
do these two processing rates compare in the long term? Give your answer 
as FBO,COntinUOUS/FBO, 
batch. Assume that the liquid feed composition, gas compo- 
sition and pressure, mass transfer and chemical rates are the same in both 
batch and continuous operations. 


=== PDF PAGE 152 ===


=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
Part IV 
Non-Catalytic Systems 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 1523 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Design 1540 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 1566 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Design I589 


=== PDF PAGE 154 ===


=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
Chapter 23 
Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Heterogeneous fluid-fluid reactions are made to take place for one of three 
reasons. First, the product of reaction may be a desired material. Such reactions 
are numerous and can be found in practically all areas of the chemical industry 
where organic syntheses are employed. An example of liquid-liquid reactions is 
the nitration of organics with a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids to form 
materials such as nitroglycerin. The chlorination of liquid benzene and other 
hydrocarbons with gaseous chlorine is an example of gas-liquid reactions. In the 
inorganic field we have the manufacture of sodium amide, a solid, from gaseous 
ammonia and liquid sodium: 
Fluid-fluid reactions may also be made to take place to facilitate the removal 
of an unwanted component from a fluid. Thus, the absorption of a solute gas by 
water may be accelerated by adding a suitable material to the water which will 
react with the solute being absorbed. Table 23.1 shows the reagents used for 
various solute gases. 
The third reason for using fluid-fluid systems is to obtain a vastly improved 
product distribution for homogeneous multiple reactions than is possible by using 
the single phase alone. Let us turn to the first two reasons, both of which concern 
the reaction of materials originally present in different phases. 
The following factors will determine how we approach this process. 
The Overall Rate Expression. Since materials in the two separate phases must 
contact each other before reaction can occur, both the mass transfer and the 
chemical rates will enter the overall rate expression. 
Equilibrium Solubility. The solubility of the reacting components will limit 
their movement from phase to phase. This factor will certainly influence the 
form of the rate equation since it will determine whether the reaction takes place 
in one or both phases. 
The Contacting Scheme. In gas-liquid systems semibatch and countercurrent 
contacting schemes predominate. In liquid-liquid systems mixed flow (mixer- 
523 


=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
524 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Table 23.1 Absorption Systems with 
Chemical Reactionu 
Solute Gas 
Reagent 
co2 
co2 
co2 
CO 
co 
SO2 
SO2 
SO2 
SO2 
c12 
c12 
H2S 
H2S 
SO3 
C2H4 
C2H4 
Olefins 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Carbonates 
Hydroxides 
Ethanolamines 
Cuprous amine complexes 
Cuprous ammonium chloride 
Ca(OH12 
Ozone-H20 
HCr04 
KOH 
Hz0 
FeC1, 
Ethanolamines 
Fe(OH13 
KOH 
Trialkyl phosphates 
Cuprous ammonium complexes 
FeSO, 
Ca(OH12 
H2SO4 
" Adapted from Teller (1960). 
settlers) and batch contacting are used in addition to counter and concurrent con- 
tacting. 
Many possible permutations of rate, equilibrium, and contacting pattern can 
be imagined; however, only some of these are important in the sense that they 
are widely used on the technical scale. 
23.1 THE RATE EQUATION 
For convenience in notation let use talk of GIL reactions, even though what we 
say holds equally for LIL reactions. Further, let us assume that gaseous A is 
soluble in the liquid but that B does not enter the gas. Thus A must enter 
and move into the liquid phase before it can react, and reaction occurs in this 
phase alone. 
Now the overall rate expression for the reaction will have to account for the 
mass transfer resistance (to bring reactants together) and the resistance of the 
chemical reactions step. Since the relative magnitude of these resistances can 
vary greatly we have a whole spectrum of possibilities to consider. 


=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 525 
Our analysis considers the following second-order reaction 
;\(g-I) 
+ b?(l) - R(s or lor g), 
-r, = kCACB 
4 
\present in gas, but 
'present in liquid 'reaction occurs in liquid only, 
soluble in liquid with 
and unable to 
maybe close to the interface 
solubility given by 
enter the gas 
(in the liquid film), maybe 
PA, = HACA~ 
phase 
in the main body of liquid 
For notation consider a unit volume of contactor Vr with its gas, liquid, and solid 
,- 
G L in contact 
in this volume 
V, = volume of 
Solid may be 
present 
liquid 
The rate of reaction is usefully written in a number of ways, as follows: 
These rates are related by 


=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
526 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Since reactant A must move from gas to liquid for reaction to occur, diffusional 
resistances enter the rate. Here we will develop everything in terms of the two- 
film theory. Other theories can and have been used; however, they give essentially 
the same result, but with more impressive mathematics. 
The Rate Equation for Straight Mass Transfer (Absorption) of A 
Here we have two resistances in series, of the gas film and of the liquid film. 
Thus, as shown in Fig. 23.1, the rate of transfer of A from gas to liquid is given 
by the rate expressions, for the gas film 
m o l  
m3 contactor. P a .  s 
and for the liquid film 
nj liquid 
( 
rn31iauid 
C 
\ - --- ---L- - - ~  
m2 surface . s 
Gas side 
Liquid side 
r Interface 
Assume equilibrium at interface, or 
pAi = H ~ i  
C ~ i  
and take HAi = constant, thus 
Figure 23.1 Setting up the rate equation for straight mass transfer based 
on the two film theory. 


=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 527 
,- 
Interface 
Reaction can take place in both the 
liquid film and in the main body of 
liquid. Fast reactions occur in a 
narrow zone within the film, slow 
reactions spread through the film 
and main body of liquid. 
7 
" 
7 
Gas 
Liquid 
Main body 
film 
film 
ofliquid 
Figure 23.2 Setting up the rate equation for absorption of A in the liquid, 
and reaction in the liquid, based on the two-film theory. 
Combining Eqs. 2 and 3 with Henry's law pAi = HACAi to eliminate the unknown 
interface conditions pAi and CAi we obtain the final rate expression for straight 
mass transfer at any point in the absorber. 
+- 
Pa . m3 liquid 
mol 
The Rate Equation for Mass Transfer and Reaction 
Here we have three factors to consider: what happens in the gas film; in the 
liquid film; and in the main body of the liquid, as shown in Fig. 23.2. 
All sorts of special forms of the rate equation can result depending on the 
relative values of the rate constants k, kg, and k,, the concentration ratio of 
reactants pAICB, and Henry's law constant HA. It turns out that there are eight 
cases to consider, going from the extreme of infinitely fast reaction rate (mass 
transfer control) to the other extreme of very slow reaction rate (no mass transfer 
resistance need be considered). 
The eight special cases, each with its particular rate equation, are, from infi- 
nitely fast to very slow reaction, as follows: 
Case A: 
Instantaneous reaction with low C, 
Case B: 
Instantaneous reaction with high CB 
Case C: 
Fast reaction in liquid film, with low CB 
Case D: 
Fast reaction in liquid film, with high C, 


=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
528 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
I 
PA 
In film and 
main body 
0 
C A  
A 
c 
0 
.- * 
m 
E' 
.w 
m 
+ 
X - 
E 
E' 
+ 
W 
Phase 
interface\ 
PA 
I 
PA 
G9 
I 
@ 
Reaction only 
in film 
Reaction 
PA 
Reaction only 
in main body 
of liquid 
.. .. 
v 
- 
Gas 
Liquid 
Figure 23.3 Interface behavior for the liquid-phase reaction 
A (from gas) + bB (liquid) +products (liquid) 
for the complete range of rates of the reaction and of the mass transfer. 
Case E and F: Intermediate rate with reaction in the film and in the main body 
of the liquid 
Case G: 
Slow reaction in main body but with film resistance 
Case W: 
Slow reaction, no mass transfer resistance 
We show these eight cases in Fig. 23.3. 


=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 529 
We discuss these special cases and present their particular rate equations later, 
after we present the general rate equation. 
+AN' = 
------ 
----- 
gas film 
liquid film 
liquid bulk 
resistance resistance 
resistance 
The absorption of A from gas is larger when reaction occurs within the liquid 
film than for straight mass transfer. Thus for the same concentrations at the two 
boundaries of the liquid film we have 
rate of take up of A 
Liquid film 
when reaction occurs 
rate of take up of A for same c, 
c ~ ,  c~ 
(6) 
in the two cases 
\ straight mass transfer / 
The value of E is always greater or equal to one. The only problem now is to 
evaluate E, the enhancement factor. Figure 23.4 shows that E is dependent on 
two quantities: 
the enhancement factor for 
an infinitely fast reaction 
(7) 
maximum possible conversion in the 
film compared with maximum transport 
(8) 
through the film 
M, stands for the Hatta modulus, in recognition of the scientist who first dealt 
with this problem, Hatta (1932). 
Let us now examine the eight special cases. 
Case A: Instantaneous Reaction with Respect to Mass Transfer. Since an ele- 
ment of liquid can contain either A or B, but not both, reaction will occur at a 
plane between A-containing and B-containing liquid. Also, since reactants must 
diffuse to this reaction plane the rate of diffusion of A and B will determine the 
rate, so that a change in p, or C, will move the plane one way or the other (see 
Fig. 23.5). At steady state the flow rate of B toward the reaction zone will be b 


=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
530 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
If Ei > 5 M, we then have 
pseudo first order reaction by 
the G/L interface in which case 
E = M H  
More precisely 
All reaction occurs 
'ie,tc, 
If Ei < MX then we have 
M,=- 
~ A I  
5 
instantaneous reaction at a plane 
on the L film in which case 
E " Ei 
More precisely: 
E~~ ( E ~ -  1 ) 
E r Ei- --- + ... 
M,: 
Figure 23.4 The enhancement factor for fluid-fluid reactions as a function of MH and Ei, 
modified from the numerical solution of van Krevelens and Hoftijzer (1954). 
times the flow rate of A toward the reaction zone. Thus, 
---------- ----------- ------------- 
A in gas film 
A in liquid film 
B in liquid film 
where k,, and k,,, k,, are the mass transfer coefficients in gas and liquid phases. 
The liquid side coefficients are for straight mass transfer without chemical reac- 
tion and are therefore based on flow through the whole film of thickness x,. 
At the interface the relationship betweenp, and C, is given by the distribution 
coefficient, called Henry's law constant for gas-liquid systems. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
23.1 The Rate Equation 531 
is at the interfa 
PA 
Case A 
Eq. 13 
Case B 
Eq. 16 
Figure 23.5 Concentration of reactants as visualized by the two-film theory for an infinitely 
fast irreversible reactions of any order, A + bB4products. Case A-low 
C,, Case B- 
high C, (see Eq. 17). 
In addition, since the movement of material within the film is visualized to occur 
by diffusion alone, the transfer coefficients for A and B are related by1 
Eliminating the unmeasured intermediates x, x,, p,,, CAi by Eqs. 9, 10, and 12, 
we obtain 
for Case A: 
( k  A ~ P A  > y) 
For the special case of negligible gas-phase resistance, for example, if you used 
pure reactant A in the gas phase, then p, = pAi or kg + w, in which case Eq. 
Alternatives to the film theory are also in use. These models [Higbie (1935); Danckwerts (1950, 
1955)l view that the liquid at the interface is continually washed away and replaced by fresh fluid 
from the main body of the liquid, and that this is the means of mass transport. These unsteady-state 
surface renewal theories all predict 
as opposed to Eq. 12, for the film theory. 
With the exception of this one difference, these models, so completely different from a physical 
standpoint, give essentially identical predictions of steady-state behavior. Because of this, and because 
the film theory is so much easier to develop and use than the other theories, we deal with it exclusively. 


=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
532 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
13 reduces to 
Case B: Instantaneous Reaction; High CB. Returning to the general situation 
shown in Fig. 23.5, if the concentration of B is raised, or more precisely, if 
then this condition, combined with Eq. 5, requires that the reaction zone move 
to and stay at the interface rather than remain in the liquid film. This is shown 
in Fig. 23.5. When this happens, the resistance of the gas-phase controls, and 
the rate is not affected by any further increase in concentration of B. In addition, 
Eq. 9 simplifies to 
for Case B: 
kBCB 
(kAgpA " 4) 
(16) 
Equation 17 tells whether Case A or Case B applies in any situation. Thus, 
Let us now look at the other cases. 
Case C: Fast Reaction; Low CW The plane of reaction for case A now spreads 
into a zone of reaction in which A and B are both present. However, reaction 
is fast enough so that this reaction zone remains totally within the liquid film. 
Thus, no A enters the main body of liquid to react there. 
Since the last resistance term in the general rate equation, Eq. 5, is negligible 
(large k), the rate form for this case is 
Case D: Fast Reaction; High CB, Hence Pseudo First-Order Rate with Respect 
to A. For the special case where CB does not drop appreciably within the film, 
it can be taken to be constant throughout, and the second-order reaction rate 
(Case C) simplifies to the more easily solved first-order rate expression. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
23.1 The Rate Equation 533 
Case C 
Case D 
(fast second order) 
(pseudo-first order) 
Eq. 18 
Eq. 19 
Figure 23.6 Location of reaction in the liquid film for a fast (but not infinitely fast) second- 
order reaction. Case C-low 
C,, Case D-high 
C,. 
the general rate expression, Eq. 5, reduces to 
Figure 23.6 sketches Cases C and D. 
Cases E and F: Intermediate Rate with Respect to Mass Transfer. Here reaction 
is slow enough for some A to diffuse through the film into the main body of the 
fluid. Consequently, A reacts both within the film and in the main body of the 
fluid. Here we have to use the general rate expression with its three resistances, 
Eq. 5. 
Case G: Slow Reaction with Respect to Mass Transfer. This represents the 
somewhat curious case where all reaction occurs in the main body of the liquid; 
however, the film still provides a resistance to the transfer of A into the main 
body of liquid. Thus, three resistances enter into the rate expression, and Eq. 5 
reduces to 
Case li: Infinitely Slow Reaction. Here the mass transfer resistance is negligible, 
the compositions of A and B are uniform in the liquid, and the rate is determined 
by chemical kinetics alone. 
Figure 23.7 shows cases G and H. 


=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
534 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Case G 
Eq. 20 
G film 
L film 
L main body 
m- * 
Case H 
Eq. 21 
Figure 23.7 Slow reactions Case G still shows film resistance. Case H shows no film resis- 
tance. 
Review of the Role of the Hatta Number, MH 
To tell whether reaction is fast or slow, we focus on unit surface of gas-liquid 
interface, we assume that gas-phase resistance is negligible, and we define a film 
conversion parameter 
2 - 
maximum possible conversion in the film 
M H  - maximum diffusional transport through the film 
(22) 
If MH 9 1, all reaction occurs in the film, and surface area is the controlling rate 
factor. On the other hand, if M, G 1 no reaction occurs in the film, and bulk 
volume becomes the controlling rate factor. More precisely, it has been found 
that: 
1. If MH > 2, reaction occurs in the film and we have Cases A, B, C, D. 
2. If 0.02 < MH < 2, we then have the intermediate Cases E, F, G. 
3. If MH < 0.02, we have the infinitely slow reaction of Case H. 
When MH is large, we should pick a contacting device which develops or 
creates large interfacial areas; energy for agitation is usually an important consid- 
eration in these contacting schemes. On the other hand, if MH is very small, all 
we need is a large volume of liquid. Agitation to create large interfacial areas 
is of no benefit here. 
Table 24.1 of the next chapter presents typical data for various contacting 
devices, and from this we see that spray or plate columns should be efficient 
devices for systems with fast reaction (or large MH), while bubble contactors 
should be more efficient for slow reactions (or small MH). 
Clues to the Kinetic Regime from Solubility Data 
For reactions which occur in the film, the phase distribution coefficient H can 
suggest whether the gas-phase resistance is likely to be important or not. To 


=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 535 
show this we write the expression for straight mass transfer of A across the gas 
and liquid films 
(gas film 
liquid film 
Now for slightly soluble gases HA is large; hence, with all other factors unchanged 
the above rate equation shows that the liquid film resistance term is large. The 
reverse holds for highly soluble gases. Thus, we see that: 
Gas film resistance controls for highly soluble gases. 
Liquid film resistance controls for slightly soluble gases. 
Table 23.2 Typical Values of HA = pAiICAi, Pa . m3/mol, for Common Gases in 
Water 
slightly soluble gas 4 
-highly soluble gas 
Note that gases are more soluble at lower temperatures. Additional values for 
many different gases can be extracted, with difficulty, from Perry and Green 
(1984) and from references given by Danckwerts (1970). 
Since a highly soluble gas is easy to absorb and has its main resistance in the 
gas phase, we would not need to add a liquid-phase reactant B to promote the 
absorption. On the other hand, a sparingly soluble gas is both difficult to absorb 
and has its main resistance in the liquid phase; hence it is this system which 
would benefit greatly by a reaction in the liquid phase. 
Final Comments 
To find the size of process unit needed for a given job (this is discussed in the 
next chapter), we need to know the overall rate of reaction. This chapter explains 
how to evaluate the overall rate of reaction. 
Many sources report on the physical and chemical constants used in this 
chapter. I recommend the following ones: 
Doraiswamy and Sharma (1984): an extensive treatment of this whole subject 
Shah (1979): evaluation of the mass transfer coefficients in various types of 
equipment. Also experimental devices for finding these coefficients. 
Danckwerts (1970): easy to follow discussion, sources for Henry's law con- 
stants, equations to use for finding mass transfer coefficients. 


=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
536 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
FINDING THE RATE OF A G/L REACTION 
Air with gaseous A bubbles through a tank containing aqueous B. Reaction 
occurs as follows: 
For this system 
k A p  = 0.01 mol/hr - m3. Pa 
fi = 0.98 
kAp = 20 hr-l 
HA = 105 Pa. m3/mol, very low solubility 
g',, = CBB, = 
m2/hr 
a = 20 m2/m3 
I 
For a point in the absorber-reactor where 
I 
pA = 5 X lo3 Pa and CB = 100 mol/m3 
(a) locate the resistance to reaction (what % is in the gas film, in the liquid 
film, in the main body of liquid) 
(b) locate the reaction zone 
(c) determine the behavior in the liquid film (whether pseudo first-order reac- 
tion, instantaneous, physical transport, etc.) 
(d) calculate the rate of reaction (mol/m3 hr) 
I SOLUTION 
This chapter has only analyzed second-order reactions, however, this problem 
deals with a third-order reaction. Since no analysis is available for other than 
second-order reactions, let us replace our third-order reaction with a second- 
order approximation. Thus, 
To find the rate from the general expression (Eq. 5), we need to first evaluate 
E, and M,. 
Let us do this: 
~ B C B H A  
= 
+ 100 x lo5 
(Ei)first guess = + 
= lo3 
bgd~i 2(5 x 10') 
1( 
Since (Ei)firstguess 
> 5 MH, then for any other smaller guess for pAi we will still 
have E, > 5 M,. 
Therefore, from Fig. 23.4 we have pseudo first-order reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
Problems 537 
in the film with 
E = MH = 100 
Now to the rate expression, Eq. 5, 
NII 
-rA = 
PA 
HA 
HA 
1 + + -  
k ~ , a   APE 
kc;fl 
- 
- 
5 x 103 
= 33 mollhr . m3 reactor 
lo5 
+ 
1.- 
lo5 
tol 20$100) 
(lo6) (loo2) (.098) 
I 
Thus, 
I 
(a) 213 of the resistance is in the gas film, 113 is in the liquid film +-- 
(b) the reaction zone is in the liquid film + 
I 
(c) reaction proceeds by a pseudd first-order reaction of A, at the interface + 
(d) the rate Is - r r  = 33 mollhr -m3 
+- 
REFERENCES 
Danckwerts, P. V., Trans. Faraday Soc., 46, 300 (1950). 
, 
AIChE J., 1, 456 (1955). 
, 
Gas-Liquid Reactions, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970. 
Doraiswamy, L. K., and Sharma, M. M., Heterogeneous Reactions, Vol. 2, John Wiley 
and Sons, New York, 1984. 
Hatta, S., Technological Reports, TBhoku University, 10, 119 (1932); from Sherwood, 
T. K., and Pigford, R. L., Absorption and Extraction, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1952. 
Higbie, R., Trans. A.Z.Ch.E., 31, 365 (1935). 
Perry, R. H., and Green, D. W., Chemical Engineers' Handbook, 6th ed., Section 3, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1984. 
Shah, Y. T., Gas-Liquid-Solid Reactor Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1979. 
Teller, A. J., Chem. Eng., 67, 111 (July 11, 1960). 
van Krevelens, D. W., and Hoftijzer, P. J., Rec. Trau. Chim., 67, 563 (1948); Trans. I. 
Chem. E., 32, 5360 (1954). 
PROBLEMS 
Gaseous A absorbs and reacts with B in liquid according to 


=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
538 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
in a packed bed under conditions where 
k A p  = 0.1 mollhr . m2 of reactor. Pa 
fi = 0.01 m3 liquid/m3 reactor 
kAla = 100 m3 liquid/m3 reactor. hr 
gAl = gBl 
= 
m2/hr 
a = 100 m2/m3 reactor 
At a point in the reactor where pA = 100 Pa and CB = 100 mol/m3 liquid 
(a) calculate the rate of reaction in mol/hr . m3 of reactor. 
(b) describe the following characteristics of the kinetics: 
location of the major resistance (gas film, liquid film, main body 
of liquid) 
behavior in the liquid film (pseudo first-order reaction, instantaneous, 
second-order reaction, physical transport) 
for the following values of reaction rate and Henry's law constant. 
k, m3 liquidlmol . hr 
HA, Pa. m3 liquidlmol 
23.1. 
10 
lo5 
23.2. 
lo6 
lo4 
23.3. 
10 
lo3 
23.4. 
lo-4 
1 
23.5. 
lo-z 
1 
23.6. 
lo8 
1 
23.7. Redo Example 23.1 with just one change. Let us suppose that C, is very 
low, or C, = 1. 
23.8. At high pressure CO, is absorbed into a solution of NaOH in a packed 
column. The reaction is as follows: 
CO, + 2NaOH -+Na2C03 + H20 with -rA, = kCACB 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
Find the rate of absorption, the controlling resistance, and what is happen- 
ing in the liquid film, at a point in the column where pA = lo5 Pa and 
C, = 500 mol/m3. 
Data: kAga = 
mol/m2. s . Pa 
HA = 25 000 Pa. m3/mol 
This problem was adapted from Danckwerts (1970). 


=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
Problems 539 
23.9. Hydrogen sulfide is absorbed by a solution of methanolamine (MEA) in 
a packed column. At the top of the column, gas is at 20 atm and it contains 
0.1% of H,S, while the absorbent contains 250 mol/m3 of free MEA. The 
diffusivity of MEA in solution is 0.64 times that of H2S. The reaction is 
normally regarded as irreversible and instantaneous. 
H,S + RNH, -+ HS- + RNH; 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
For the flow rates and packing used 
k~ 
= 60 mol/m3 - s atm 
HA = 1 x 
m3 - atmlmol, Henry's law constant for H2S in water. 
(a) Find the rate of absorption of H,S in MEA solution. 
(b) To find out whether it is worthwhile using MEA absorbent, determine 
how much faster is absorption with MEA compared to absorption in 
pure water. 
This problem was adapted from Danckwerts (1970). 


=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
We must first choose the right kind of contactor, then find the size needed. There 
are two kinds of contactor-towers and tanks, and Fig. 24.1 shows some examples. 
As may be expected, these contactors have widely different GIL volume ratios, 
interfacial areas, kg and k,, and concentration driving forces. The particular 
properties of the system you are dealing with, the solubility of gaseous reactant, 
the concentration of reactants, etc.-in 
effect the location of the main resistance 
in the rate equation-will 
suggest that you use one class of contactor and not 
the other. 
Table 24.1 shows some of the characteristics of these contactors. 
Factors to Consider in Selecting a Contactor 
(a) Contacting pattern. We idealize these as shown in Fig. 24.2. 
Towers approximate plug Glplug L. 
Bubble tanks approximate plug Glmixed L. 
Agitated tanks approximate mixed Glmixed L. 
As we shall see, towers have the largest mass transfer driving force and 
in this respect have an advantage over tanks. Agitated tanks have the 
smallest driving force. 
(b) kg and k,. For liquid droplets in gas kg is high, k, is low. For gas bubbles 
rising in liquid kg is low, k, is high. 
(c) Flow rates. Packed beds work best with relative flow rates of about F,IF, 7 
10 at 1 bar. Other contactors are more flexible in that they work well in 
a wider range of F,IFg values. 
(d) If the resistance is in the gas andlor liquid films you want a large interfacial 
area "a," thus most agitated contactors and most columns. If the L film 
dominates, stay away from spray contactors. If the G film dominates stay 
away from bubble contactors. 
(e) If the resistance is in the main body of the L you want large f, = V,/V,. 
Stay away from towers. Use tank contactors. 
(f) Solubility. For very soluble gases, those with a small value of Henry's law 
constant H (ammonia, for example), gas film controls, thus you should 


=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
Selection 541 
Irrigated 
Staged bubble 
Spray tower 
packed bed 
Plate tower 
tower 
Can have perforated plates, 
Static mixer 
and pulsing action 
Bubble tank 
Agitated tank 
G 
L 
\ 
Ether with or / 
without flow of L 
Figure 24.1 Tower and tank contactors for GIL reactions. 
avoid bubble contactors. For gases of low solubility in the liquid, thus high 
H value (O,, N,, as examples) liquid film controls, so avoid spray towers. 
(g) Reaction lowers the resistance of the liquid film, so 
For absorption of highly soluble gases, chemical reaction is not helpful. 
For absorption of slightly soluble gases, chemical reaction is helpful and 
does speed up the rate. 
Nomenclature. We use the following symbols in our development. 
A, = cross-sectional area of column. 
a = interfacial contact area per unit volume of reactor (m2/m3). 
f, = volume fraction of liquid (-). 
i = any participant, reactant or product, in the reaction. 
A, B, R, S = participants in the reaction. 
U = carrier or inert component in a phase, hence neither reactant 
nor product. 
T = total moles in the reacting (or liquid) phase. 
Y, = pAlpU, moles Almole inert in the gas (-). 
X, = CA/Cu, moles Almole inert in the liquid (-). 
Fi, F; = molar flow rate of ail the gas and the liquid (molls). 
F, = Fip,l~, upward molar flow rate of inerts in the gas (molls). 


=== PDF PAGE 174 ===


=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
24.1 Straight Mass Transfer 543 
Steady 
--- 
state 
operations 
Plug Glplug L 
Plug Glplug L 
Plug Glmixed L 
Mixed Glmixed L 
Batch 
Unsteady-state operations 
of L 
(semibatch) where the liquid 
composition changes with time 
Mixed Glbatch uniform L 
Plug Glbatch uniform L 
Figure 24.2 Contacting patterns for GIL contactors. 
F, = F ;  C,ICT, downward molar flow rate of inerts in the liquid phase 
(molls). 
With this nomenclature, we have the following relationships among the various 
concentration measures. 
The performance equations which are written in terms of F, and Fl are useful 
when the flowing streams have inert carrier material. The equation written in 
terms of FB and F ;  are useful when the flowing streams only contain reactive 
materials and no inerts. 
24.1 STRAIGHT MASS TRANSFER 
Since the approach for reacting systems is a straightforward extension of straight 
mass transfer, let us first develop equations for absorption alone of A by liquid 
A (gas) + A (liquid) 


=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
544 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
then go to reacting systems. 
Note the similarity in the performance equations. 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Countercurrent 
Flow in a Tower 
To develop the performance equation, we combine the rate equation with the 
material balance. Thus for steady-state countercurrent operations we have for 
a differential element of volume 
(A lost by gas) = (A gained by liquid) = (-rr)dV, 
Integrating for the whole tower gives 
In brief, the design procedure is summarized in Fig. 24.3. For dilute systems 
CA < C, and pA G n, so Fb = F, and F ;  = F,. In this situation the differential 
material balance becomes 
and for any two points in the absorber 


=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
24.1 Straight Mass Transfer 545 
+ 
Gas -& 
Liquid --f 
Interface at any point 
High CA 
in tower 
The operating line is slightly curved here. 
The shaded area 
1 
Y A 
Figure 24.3 Illustration of the design procedure for straight mass transfer in countercur- 
rent towers. 
The rate expression reduces to 
= K A , ~ ( P A  
- ~ 2 )  
= K
A
~
C
~
 
- CAI 
Thus the general integrated rate expression of Eq. 2 becomes, with Eq. 3, 
coefficient on gas 
with gas PA, or 
1 - 1  HA 
---+- 
p i  = HACA 
-- 
1 
1 
1 
+ - CL=pAIHA 
-- 
K
~
g
 
k
~
g
 k
~
l
 
K
~
l
 
k
~
l
 


=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
546 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
For the other contacting patterns of Fig. 24.2 plug Glplug L cocurrent, mixed 
Glmixed L, plug Glmixed L, mixed Glplug L, mixed Glbatch L see Levenspiel 
(1996) Chapter 42, or recall the equations and methods from your lessons in 
mass transfer and unit operations. 
24.2 
MASS TRANSFER PLUS NOT VERY SLOW REACTION 
Here we only treat the reaction A (g -+ 1) + bB(1) -+ products (1). We assume 
that the rate is fast enough so that no unreacted A enters the main body of the 
liquid. This assumes that the Hatta modulus is not very much smaller than unity. 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in a Countercurrent 
Tower 
For a differential slice of absorber-reactor we write 
(A lost) = ( B lost ) = ( disappearance 
by gas 
b by liquid 
of A by reaction 
----- 
- - - - - - - 
I11 
------------ 
I 
I1 
For Dilute Systems. p, = n and C, = C, in which case the above expressions 
simplify to 


=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 547 
Rearranging and integrating I and 11, I1 and 111, I and I11 gives the following: 
In general 
- 
-- 
Fi 
... with 
Fg(Y~2- Y ~ l )  
= - (XBl - xB2) 
b 
For dilute systems 
from point 1 to and point i in the tower 
d C ~  ... with 
F 
g ( ~ & ? - ~ A l )  
'IT 
= F I ( c ~ ~ -  'B1) 
b CT 
To Solve for Vr 
pick a fewp, values, usually pAl ,p,, and one intermediate value are enough, 
and for each p, find the corresponding CB. 
evaluate the rate for each point from 
integrate the performance equation graphically 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in a Cocurrent Tower 
Here simply change Fl to -Fl (for upflow of both streams) or F, to -F, (for 
downflow of both streams) in the equations for countercurrent flow. Be sure to 
find the proper C, value for eachp,. The rest of the procedure remains the same. 


=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
548 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Mixed Flow GIMixed Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in an Agitated 
Tank Contactor 
Since the composition is the same everywhere in the vessel make an accounting 
about the vessel as a whole. Thus, 
disappearance of 
A by reaction 
Whole vessel is well 
I 
mixed and at exit 
G 
P A I ~  
conditions 
In symbols these equalities become 
4 
Fg(YAin - Y ~ o u t )  = - (X 
b 
Bin - X ~ o u t )  = (-'?)/at 
exit conditions 
for both G and L 
and for dilute systems 
F 
Ain 
Aout 
F l  
(P - P 
) = - 
(CBin - CBout) = (-'?)]at 
exit Vr 
bC, 
Tojind V, the solution is direct; evaluate -rT from known stream compositions 
and solve Eq. 11 or 12. 
To jind C,,,, and p,,, given Vr guess pAout 
, evaluate CBout, 
then -rT, then Vr . 
Compare the calculated Vr value with the true value. If different, guess an- 
other PAOUt . 
Plug Flow GIMixed Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in Bubble 
Tank Contactors 
Here we must make two accountings, a differential balance for the loss of A 
from the gas because G is in plug flow, and an overall balance for B because L 
is in mixed flow. 
Focusing on a bit of rising gas, we have 
(ti::) 
= ( 
disappearance of 
... or... FgdYA=(-rT)ILatexit 
dVr 
(13) 
A by reaction 
conditions 


=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 549 
All liquid 
Fg I pAin 
is at cBOut 
For the liquid as a whole and for the gas as a whole, a balance about the whole 
reactor gives 
Integrating Eq. 13 along the path of the bubble and also using Eq. 14 gives 
In general 
... with ... 
Fg(YAi,- YAou;) = 
( X ~ i n  - X ~ ~ u t )  
for liquid at C
B
~
~
~
 
For dilute systems 
F 
... with ... 
g ( ~ A i n - p A o u t )  
= a ( c B i . -  
CB0.t) 
~ C T  
If Vr is to be found and the exit conditions are known, then the procedure is 
direct. Pick a number of p, values and integrate graphically. 
If p,,,, 
and CBou, are to be found in a reactor of known volume Vr then we - 
require a trial and error solution. Simply guess C,,,, 
and then see if Vc,,c,,,,,d - 
v,,,, . 
Mixed Flow GIBatch Uniform L-Absorption + Reaction in a Batch Agitated 
Tank Contactor 
Since this is not a steady-state operation, composition and rates all change with 
time, as shown in Fig. 24.4. At any instant the material balance equates the three 


=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
550 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
V, volume of L - 
V, volume of . 
G/L emulsion 
Rises with time as B is consumed 
At any instant CB is the same 
everywhere in the tank. However 
CB decreases with time because 
of reaction with A. 
At the start CB = CBO 
At the end CB = C B ~  
f 
Constant -/ 
Figure 24.4 History of a batch of reacting liquid. 
quantities shown below and thus in general 
Vl ~ C B  
Fg(YAin - YAoui) 
= 
= (-rr)Vr 
------------- 
b dt 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
I 
I1 
I11 
loss of A from gas 
decrease of 
disappearance of A or B 
B with time by reaction. In the rate 
in L 
expression use p~~~~ since 
G is in mixed flow. 
For dilute systems 
F 
a 
Ain 
Aout 
v, ~ C B  
A (p 
- 
) = 
= (-rr)Vr 
b dt 
To Find the Time Needed for a Given Operation 
Choose a number of CB values, say C,,, CBf and an intermediate CB value. 
For each C, value guess pA0,, . 
Next calculate MH, E,, and then E and -rr. This may require trial and 
error, but not often. 
See if terms I and I11 are equal to each other 
and keep adjusting pAOu, until they do. 
As a shortcut: if pA < a and if E = MH then E is independent of pA in which 
case I and I11 combine to give 


=== PDF PAGE 183 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 551 
Next combine terms I1 and I11 to find the processing time 
h C B O d C ,  
t = - 1  
. . . solve graphically 
b cBf - r r  
This time can be compared with the minimum needed if all A reacts and 
none escapes the vessel. This situation is represented by p,,,, 
= 0 at all 
times. Thus 
1 
1 amount of B reacted 
- (
0
 
- f 
b (away in the vessel 
t-:- = b 
- 
- 
,Lull 
. , 
amount of A entering 
the vessel in unit time 
Combining t and tmin gives the efficiency of utilization of A. Thus 
percent of entering A 
which reacts with B 
Example 24.6 illustrates this procedure for batch absorber-reactors. 
TOWERS FOR STRAIGHT ABSORPTION 
The concentration of undesirable impurity in air (at 1 bar = lo5 Pa) is to be 
reduced from 0.1% (or 100 Pa) to 0.02% (or 20 Pa) by absorption in pure water. 
Find the height of tower required for countercurrent operations. 
Data 
For consistency let us use SI units throughout. 
For the packing 


=== PDF PAGE 184 ===
552 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
The solubility of A in water is given by Henry's law constant 
HA = p,,/C,, 
= 12.5 Pa. m3/mol 
The flow rates per meter squared cross section of tower are 
F,/A, = 1 x 105 mol/hr m2 
F,/A, = 7 X lo5 mollhr . m2 
The molar density of liquid under all conditions is 
C, = 56 000 mol/m3 
Figure E24.1 shows the quantities known at this point. 
point 
tower 
in the 
Figure E24.1 
Our strategy is to first solve the material balance, then determine the tower 
height. Since we are dealing with dilute solutions we may use the simplified form 
of the material balance. So for any point in the tower p, and CA are related by 
Eq. 4. 


=== PDF PAGE 185 ===
24.2 
Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 553 
from which the concentration of A in the liquid leaving the tower is 
The expression for tower height is, from Eq. 6, 
Now evaluate terms 
This expression shows that 
I 
G film resistance = 3.1251128.125 = 0.024, or 2.4% 
L film resistance = 1251128.125 = 0.976, or 97.6% 
and 
(KAga) = 11128.125 = 0.0078 mollhr . m3. Pa 
Next evaluate p, - pz. Thus with Eq. (i) we get 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Inserting Eqs. (iv) and (v) in (iii) gives 
h = 
(1 x lo5 mollhr - m2) 
(lo5 Pa)(0.0078 mollhr . m3. Pa) 
= (128.125) (
2
0
)
-
 
loo - 20 = 512.5 rn 
Comment. Here the tower is very high, unacceptably high. Also note that most 
of the resistance (over 97%) lies in the liquid film, making this a liquid-film- 
controlling process. However, if we added component B to the liquid which 
reacts with A, we should be able to speed things-up. Let's see if this-is so. 


=== PDF PAGE 186 ===
554 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
TOWERS FOR HIGH CONCENTRATION OF LIQUID 
REACTANT 
To the water of Example 24.1 add a high concentration of reactant B, C,, = 
800 mol/m3 or approximately 0.8 N. Material B reacts with A extremely rapidly 
I 
A(g -, 1) + B(1) +product (1), 
k = w 
Assume that the diffusivities of A and B in water are the same, thus 
k,, = k,/ = k, 
Figure E24.2 shows what is known at this point. 
Figure E24.2 
The strategy in solving the problem is as follows 
Step 1. Express the material balance and find CB2 in the exit stream. 
Step 2. Find which of the many forms of rate equation should be used. 
Step 3. Determine the tower height. 
Step 1. Material balance. For dilute solutions with rapid reaction Eq. 6 gives 
for any point in the tower, p,,, 
CB3 


=== PDF PAGE 187 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 555 
At the bottom of the tower p,, 
= pA2, so 
1 
C - - 
(10 020 - 100) = 793.6 mol/m3 
B2 - 12.5 
Step 2. Form of rate equation to use. Check both ends of the tower: 
kAgapA = (0.32)(20) = 6.4 mol/hr . m3 
at top 
kpCB = (0.1)(800) = 80 mol/hr . m3 
kAgapA = (0.32)(100) = 32 
at bottom 
k,aC, = (0.1)(793.6) = 79.36 
At both ends of the tower kAgpA < klCB; therefore, gas-phase resistance controls 
and we have a pseudo first-order reaction as given by Eq. 16 of Chapter 23 
Step 3. Height of tower. From Eq. 10 
Comment. Even though the liquid phase controls in physical absorption (see 
Example 24.1), it does not necessarily follow that it should still control when 
reaction occurs. In fact, we see here in Example 24.2 that it is the gas phase 
alone which influences the rate of the overall process. Reaction serves merely 
to eliminate the resistance of the liquid film. Also note the remarkable improve- 
ment in performance; 5 versus 500 m. 
TOWERS FOR LOW CONCENTRATION OF LIQUID 
REACTANT; CASE A 
I 
I 
Repeat Example 24.2 using a feed with CB, = 32 mol/m3, instead of 800 moll 
m3, see Fig. E24.3. 


=== PDF PAGE 188 ===
556 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Figure E24.3 
As in the previous examples, solve by making a material balance, check the 
form of rate equation to use, then apply the performance equation to find the 
tower height. 
Step 1. Material Balance. As in Example 24.2, for any point in the tower, 
and for the bottom of the tower where p, = 100 Pa, 
Step 2. Which Rate firm to Use. Again check both ends of the tower to see 
which rate form applies 
kA,apA = 0.32(20) = 6.4 
at top 
klaCB = 0.1(32) = 3.2 
kQapA = 0.32(100) = 32 
at bottom 
klaCB = 0.1(35.6) = 2.56 
At both ends of the tower kAgapA > k,aCB, therefore, the reaction takes place 
within the liquid film and Eq. 13 in Chapter 23 should be used, 
reactor. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 189 ===
24.2 
Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 557 
I 
Step 3. Height of Tower. From Eq. 6, 
TOWERS FOR INTERMEDIATE CONCENTRATIONS OF 
LIQUID REACTANT 
Repeat Example 24.2 using a feed in which CB = 128 mol/m3. 
SOLUTION 
Refer to Fig. E24.4, and solve as with the previous examples. 
--- 0 
1 
Reaction at 
interface 
Reaction in 
liquid film 
--- @ 
P A 2 = 1 0 0 ~ a >  
b c B 2 = ?  
Figure E24.4 
Step 1. Material balance. As with Examples 24.2 and 24.3 we have at any point 
in the tower, 
and at the bottom of the tower, 
Step 2. Form of rate equation to use. Check both ends of the tower: 
kAgapA = 6.4 rnollhr m3 
at top 
klaCB = 12.8 mol . hr . m3 
kAgapA = 32 
at bottom 
k,aC, = 12.16 


=== PDF PAGE 190 ===
558 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
At the top kAgpA < klCB; hence, Eq. 16 in Chapter 23 must be used. At the 
bottom kAgpA > k,CB; hence, Eq. 13 in Chapter 23 must be used. 
Let us now find the condition at which the reaction zone just reaches the 
interface and where the form of rate equation changes. This occurs where 
Solving with the material balance we find that the change occurs at pA = 39.5 Pa. 
Step 3. Height of Tower. Writing the performance equation we have, from Eq. 6, 
Noting that two different rate forms must be used, we have 
(iii) 
Comment. In this example we see that two distinct zones are present. Situations 
may be encountered where even another zone may be present. For example, if 
the entering liquid contains insufficient reactant, a point is reached in the tower 
where all this reactant is consumed. Below this point physical absorption alone 
takes place in reactant-free liquid. The methods of these examples, when used 
together, deal in a straightforward manner with this three-zone situation and 
van Krevelens and Hoftijzer (1948) discuss actual situations where these three 
distinct zones are present. 
Comparing solutions for the four examples shows how reaction increases the 
effectiveness of the absorption process. 
REDO EXAMPLE 24.2 BY THE GENERAL METHOD 
In Example 24.2 we found which of the eight special cases (see Fig. 23.3) applied 
and then used its corresponding rate equation (it was Eq. 23.16). Alternatively 
we could have used the general rate expression (Eq. 23.5). This is what we will 
show here. 


=== PDF PAGE 191 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 559 
1 SOLUTION 
From Example 24.2 a material balance gives the tower end conditions, as shown 
in Fig. E24.5. Now the rate of reaction at any point in the tower is, from Eq. 23.5, 
Figure E24.5 
Evaluate E at various points in the tower. For this we need to first evaluate MH 
and E,. 
At the Top of the Tower. From Fig. 23.4 
MH = 
= W ,  
because k = w 
k,, 
(ii) 
We have to guess the value of p,,. It can be anywhere between 0 Pa (gas film 
controls) up to 20 Pa (liquid film controls). Let us guess no gas-phase resistance. 
Then pAi = p,, in which case 
and from Fig. 23.4, for MH = a, Ei = 500, we see that 


=== PDF PAGE 192 ===
560 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Replacing in Eq. (i) we find 
<93% 
b% 
... resistance 
Our guess was wrong, so let's try again. Let us guess the other extreme, pAi = 
0, meaning that the total resistance is in the gas film. Then from Eq. (ii) we see 
that Ei = w, E = co and the rate equation becomes 
(iii) 
Thus our guess was correct. 
At the Bottom of the Tower. We follow the same procedure and find the same 
result. Thus the rate at all points in the tower is given by Eq. (iii). The height 
of the tower, from Eq. 10, is then (see step 3 of Example 24.2) 
Suggestion. Whenever MH > Ei we end up having to guess pAi, and that is 
tedious. In those cases try to use the special case expressions. 
In other cases (and this is what we usually find) the general rate equation is 
easier to use. 
/ EXAMPLE 24.6 
REACTION OF A BATCH OF LIQUID 
We wish to lower the concentration of B in the liquid (V, = 1.62 m3, C, = 
55555.6 mol/m3) of an agitated tank reactor by bubbling gas (F, = 9000 mollhr, 
n = lo5 Pa) containing A (pAh = 1000 Pa) through it. A and B react as follows: 
(a) How long must we bubble gas through the vessel to lower the concentration 
from C, = 555.6 to CBf = 55.6 mol/m3? 
(b) What percent of entering A passes through the vessel unreacted? 
I 
Additional Data 
k,,a 
= 0.72 mollhr . m3. Pa 
f, = 0.9 m3 liquid/m3 total 
kA,a = 144 hr-I 
gA 
= qB 
= 3.6 X 
m2/hr, 
a = 100 m2/m3 
HA = lo3 Pa. m3/mol 
k = 2.6 x los m3/mol. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 193 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 561 
Figure E24.6 
I SOLUTION 
Let us sketch what is known in Fig. E24.6. 
- 555 
555.6, or higher 
E i = l +  - 
- 
p Ai 
1000 
Since pA 4 n and E = MH the text says we can use the shortcut outlined above 
Eq. 19. Let us do it. 
At the end, following a similar treatment, we find 
M H z  5 
E = M H =  5.0 
Ei 
= 55.6, or higher 


=== PDF PAGE 194 ===
562 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
The rate of reaction at the beginning and at the end of the run is just about the 
same, so 
Thus the run time needed is 
The minimum time required is 
t .  = 
vdcBO 
- c ~ f )  - 
- 1.62(555.6 - 55.6) 
= 8.91 hr 
min 
Fg(pAi,l(a - pAin)) 9000(1000/(105 - 100)) = 
Thus the fraction of reactant which passes through the tank untreated is 
Fraction = 9'13 - 8'91 = 0.025 = 
8.19 
- 
REFERENCES 
van Krevelens, D. W., and Hoftijzer, P., Rec. Trau. Chim., 67, 563 (1948). 
Kramers, H., and Westerterp, K. R., Elements of Chemical Reactor Design and Operation, 
PROBLEMS 
24.1. The four pA versus CA sketches of Fig. 24.2 represent various possible 
ideal contacting schemes of gas with liquid. Sketch the contacting scheme 
for straight physical absorption corresponding to the p, versus CA op- 
erating lines X Y  shown in Fig. P24.1. 
(a) 
(6) 
(c) 
Figure P24.1 


=== PDF PAGE 195 ===
Problems 563 
We plan to remove about 90% of the A present in a gas stream by 
absorption in water which contains reactant B. Chemicals A and B react 
in the liquid as follows: 
B has a negligible vapor pressure, hence does not go into the gas phase. 
We plan to do this absorption in either a packed bed column, or an 
agitated tank contactor. 
(a) What volume of contactor is needed? 
(b) Where does the resistance of absorption reaction lie? 
Data 
For the gas stream: 
Fg = 90 000 mollhr at n = lo5 Pa 
p, 
= 1000 Pa 
pAout = 100 Pa 
Physical data 
CB = 3.6 X 
m2/hr 
C, = 55 556 mol H20/m3 liquid, at all CB 
For the packed bed 
Fl = 900 000 mol/hr 
kAla = 72 hr-l 
CBi, = 55.56 mol/m3 
a = 100 m2/m3 
kka = 0.36 mollhr . m3. Pa 
fi = Vl/V = 0.08 
For the agitated tank 
Fl = 9000 mol/hr 
kAla = 144 hr-l 
CBin = 5556 mol/m3 (about 10% B) 
a = 200 m2/m3 
kAga = 0.72 mol/hr . m3. Pa 
fi = Vl/V = 0.9 
Note that Fl and CBin are very different in packed beds and tank contactors, 
and here is the reason why. Packed columns need Fl/Fg = 10 for satisfactory 
operations. This means large F,, and so as not to waste reactant B, it is 
introduced in low concentration. On the other hand, tank contactors do 
not have this flow restriction. Thus we can use low Fl and high CBin, as 
long as we introduce sufficient B to react with A. 


=== PDF PAGE 196 ===
564 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Henry's Law 
For 
Constant: HA, 
Reaction: k, 
Pa. m3/mol 
m3/mol. hr 
Type of 
Contactor 
T = Tower, 
Countercurrent 
A = Agitated 
Tank 
In these problems 
A 
of straight mass 
transfer assume 
T 
that no B is 
present in the 
T 
system. 
24.11. Danckwerts and Gillham, in Trans. I. Chem. E., 44, 42, March 1966, 
studied the rate of CO, absorption into an alkaline buffered solution of 
K2C03 and KHCO,. The resulting reaction can be represented as 
CO,(g -1) + OH-(1) -+HCO; 
with 
-r, = kCACB 
(A) 
(B) 
In the experiment pure CO, at 1 atm was bubbled into a packed column 
irrigated by rapidly recirculating solution kept at 20°C and close to con- 
stant C,. Find the fraction of entering CO, absorbed. 
Data 
Column: V, = 0.6041 m3 
f, = 0.08 
a = 120 m2/m3 
Gas: 
n = 101 325 Pa 
HA = 3500 Pa. m3/mol v, = 0.0363 m3/s 
Liquid: CB = 300 mol/m3 
gA, = gB1 
= 1.4 x 
m2/s 
Rates: 
k = 0.433 m3/mol. s 
kAla = 0.025 s-I 
This problem is by Barry Kelly. 
24.12. A column packed with 5-cm polypropylene saddles (a = 55 m2/m3) is 
being designed for the removal of chlorine from a gas stream (G = 100 
molls .m2, 2.36% Cl,) by countercurrent contact with an NaOH solution 


=== PDF PAGE 197 ===
Problems 565 
(L = 250 mol/s.m2, 10% NaOH, C, = 2736 mol/m3) at about 40-45°C 
and 1 atm. 
How high should the tower be for 99% removal of chlorine? Double 
the calculated height to take care of deviations from plug flow. 
Data 
The reaction C1, + 2NaOH -+ product is very very fast and irreversible. 
For these very high flow rates (close to the limits allowed) an extrapolation 
of the correlations in Perry 6th ed., section 14, gives 
k,a = 133 mollhr . m3. atm 
HA = 125 X 106 atm . m3/mol 
k,a = 45 hr-l 
= 1.5 X 
m2/s 
Repeat Example 24.6 with the following two changes 
Henry's Law Constant 
Second-Order Reaction Rate, Constant 
HA, Pa. m3/mol 
k, m3/mol. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 198 ===
Chapter 25 
Fluid-Particle Reactions: 
Kinetics 
This chapter treats the class of heterogeneous reactions in which a gas or liquid 
contacts a solid, reacts with it, and transforms it into product. Such reactions 
may be represented by 
A(fluid) + bB(so1id) 4 fluid products 
(1) 
+solid products 
(2) 
+fluid and solid products 
(3) 
As shown in Fig. 25.1, solid particles remain unchanged in size during reaction 
when they contain large amounts of impurities which remain as a nonflaking ash 
or if they form a firm product material by the reactions of Eq. 2 or Eq. 3. Particles 
shrink in size during reaction when a flaking ash or product material is formed 
or when pure B is used in the reaction of Eq. 1. 
Fluid-solid reactions are numerous and of great industrial importance. Those 
in which the solid does not appreciably change in size during reaction are as 
follows. 
1. The roasting (or oxidation) of sulfide ores to yield the metal oxides. For 
example, in the preparation of zinc oxide the sulfide ore is mined, crushed, 
separated from the gangue by flotation, and then roasted in a reactor to 
form hard white zinc oxide particles according to the reaction 
Similarly, iron pyrites react as follows: 
2. The preparation of metals from their oxides by reaction in reducing atmo- 
spheres. For example, iron is prepared from crushed and sized magnetite 


=== PDF PAGE 199 ===
Particle Size 567 
Initial 
Partly 
Completely 
unreacted 
reacted 
reacted 
particle 
particle 
particle 
Time 
Time 
Final particle is 
- - 
hard, firm, and 
unchanged in size 
Initial 
unreacted 
particle 
Time 
Time 
Time 
Particle shrinks 
- 
@ - 
o 
with time, finally 
disappearing. 
Flaking ash or gaseous 
products cause 
shrinkage in size 
Figure 25.1 Different sorts of behavior of reacting solid particles. 
ore in continuous-countercurrent, three-stage, fluidized-bed reactors ac- 
cording to the reaction 
3. The nitrogenation of calcium carbide to produce cyanamide 
4. The protective surface treatment of solids such as the plating of metals. 
The most common examples of fluid-solid reactions in which the size of solid 
changes are the reactions of carbonaceous materials such as coal briquettes, 
wood, etc. with low ash content to produce heat or heating fuels. For example, 
with an insufficient amount of air, producer gas is formed by the reactions 
With steam, water gas is obtained by the reactions 


=== PDF PAGE 200 ===
568 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetio 
Other examples of reactions in which solids change in size are as follows. 
1. The manufacture of carbon disulfide from the elements 
2. The manufacture of sodium cyanide from sodium amide 
3. The manufacture of sodium thiosulfate from sulfur and sodium sulfite 
Still other examples are the dissolution reactions, the attack of metal chips by 
acids, and the rusting of iron. 
In Chapter 17 we pointed out that the treatment of heterogeneous reaction 
required the consideration of two factors in addition to those normally encoun- 
tered in homogeneous reactions: the modification of the kinetic expressions 
resulting from the mass transfer between phases and the contacting patterns of 
the reacting phases. 
In this chapter we develop the rate expressions for fluid-solid reactions. The 
next chapter will then use this information in design. 
25.1 SELECTION OF A MODEL 
We should clearly understand that every conceptual picture or model for the 
progress of reaction comes with its mathematical representation, its rate equation. 
Consequently, if we choose a model we must accept its rate equation, and vice 
versa. If a model corresponds closely to what really takes place, then its rate 
expression will closely predict and describe the actual kinetics; if a model differs 
widely from reality, then its kinetic expressions will be useless. We must remem- 
ber that the most elegant and high-powered mathematical analysis based on a 
model which does not match reality is worthless for the engineer who must make 
design predictions. What we say here about a model holds not only in deriving 
kinetic expressions but in all areas of engineering. 
The requirement for a good engineering model is that it be the closest represen- 
tation of reality which can be treated without too many mathematical complexi- 
ties. It is of little use to select a model which very closely mirrors reality but 
which is so complicated that we cannot do anything with it. Unfortunately, in 
today's age of computers, this all too often happens. 
For the noncatalytic reaction of particles with surrounding fluid, we consider 
two simple idealized models, the progressive-conversion model and the shrinking 
unreacted-core model. 
Progressive-Conversion Model (PCM). Here we visualize that reactant gas 
enters and reacts throughout the particle at all times, most likely at different 
rates at different locations within the particle. Thus, solid reactant is converted 
continuously and progressively throughout the particle as shown in Fig. 25.2. 


=== PDF PAGE 201 ===
25.1 Selection 0.f a Model 569 
Low 
conversion 
High 
conversion 
Radial position 
Figure 25.2 According to the progressive-conversion model, reaction pro- 
ceeds continuously throughout the solid particle. 
Shrinking-Core Model (SCM). Here we visualize that reaction occurs first at 
the outer skin of the particle. The zone of reaction then moves into the solid, 
leaving behind completely converted material and inert solid. We refer to these 
as "ash." Thus, at any time there exists an unreacted core of material which 
shrinks in size during reaction, as shown in Fig. 25.3. 
Comparison of Models with Real Situations. In slicing and examining the cross 
section of partly reacted solid particles, we usually find unreacted solid material 
surrounded by a layer of ash. The boundary of this unreacted core may not 
Low 
Ash 
Time * 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
zone 
I 
I 
+ 
0, 
c 1 ,  , ,I* 
I I I k*
I 
I 
.2 E 
4- 0 
I 
m m  
I 
$ 9  
1 
I 
I 
8.2 
1 
I 
I 
SSI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R
O
R
 
R
O
R
 
R
O
R
 
Radial position 
Figure 25.3 According to the shrinking-core model, reaction pro- 
ceeds at a narrow front which moves into the solid particle. Reactant 
is completely converted as the front passes by. 


=== PDF PAGE 202 ===
570 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
always be as sharply defined as the model pictures it; nevertheless, evidence 
from a wide variety of situations indicates that in most cases the shrinking-core 
model (SCM) approximates real particles more closely than does the progressive- 
conversion model (PCM). Observations with burning coal, wood, briquettes, and 
tightly wrapped newspapers also favor the shrinking-core model. For further 
discussion on the many other models used (at least ten), see Chapter 55 in 
Levenspiel (1996). 
Since the SCM seems to reasonably represent reality in a wide variety of 
situations, we develop its kinetic equations in the following section. In doing this 
we consider the surrounding fluid to be a gas. However, this is done only for 
convenience since the analysis applies equally well to liquids. 
25.2 
SHRINKING-CORE MODEL FOR SPHERICAL PARTICLES 
OF UNCHANGING SIZE 
This model was first developed by Yagi and Kunii (1955, 1961), who visualized 
five steps occurring in succession during reaction (see Fig. 25.4). 
Step 1. Diffusion of gaseous reactant A through the film surrounding the 
particle to the surface of the solid. 
Step 2. Penetration and diffusion of A through the blanket of ash to the surface 
of the unreacted core. 
Step 3. Reaction of gaseous A with solid at this reaction surface. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
l
l
 I
 
t 
R  
rc 
0 
r c r R  
Radial position 
Figure 25.4 Representation of concentrations of reactants and prod- 
ucts for the reaction A(g) + bB(s) -+ solid product for a particle 
of unchanging size. 


=== PDF PAGE 203 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 571 
Step 4. Diffusion of gaseous products through the ash back to the exterior 
surface of the solid. 
Step 5. Diffusion of gaseous products through the gas film back into the main 
body of fluid. 
In some situations some of these steps do not exist. For example, if no gaseous 
products are formed, steps 4 and 5 do not contribute directly to the resistance 
to reaction. Also, the resistances of the different steps usually vary greatly one 
from the other. In such cases we may consider that step with the highest resistance 
to be rate-controlling. 
In this treatment we develop the conversion equations for spherical particles 
in which steps 1, 2, and 3, in turn, are rate-controlling. We then extend the 
analysis to nonspherical particles and to situations where the combined effect 
of these three resistances must be considered. 
Diffusion Through Gas Film Controls 
Whenever the resistance of the gas film controls, the concentration profile for 
gaseous reactant A will be shown as in Fig. 25.5. From this figure we see that 
no gaseous reactant is present at the particle surface; hence, the concentration 
driving force, CAg - C, becomes C,, and is constant at all times during reaction 
of the particle. Now since it is convenient to derive the kinetic equations based 
on available surface, we focus attention on the unchanging exterior surface of a 
particle S,. Noting from the stoichiometry of Eqs. 1,2, and 3 that dNB = bdNA, 
we write 
1 dNB - 
1 dNB - 
b dNA = bkg(CAg - C,) 
= bkgCAg = constant 
(4) 
S, dt 
4nR2 dt 
4n-R2 dt 
1 - 
/Surface 
of shrinking 
.--- 
unreacted core 
,/ 
 as film '\, 
Surface of particle 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Concentration 
* 
R 
r 
0 r 
R 
Radial position 
Figure 25.5 Representation of a reacting particle when diffusion 
through the gas film is the controlling resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 204 ===
572 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
If we let p, be the molar density of B in the solid and V  be the volume of a 
particle, the amount of B present in a particle is 
N B = e V =  (~2:) 
--- (m3 solid) 
The decrease in volume or radius of unreacted core accompanying the disappear- 
ance of dNB moles of solid reactant is then given by 
Replacing Eq. 6 in 4 gives the rate of reaction in terms of the shrinking radlus 
of unreacted core, or 
where kg is the mass transfer coefficient between fluid and particle; see the 
discussion leading up to Eq. 24. Rearranging and integrating, we find how the 
unreacted core shrinks with time. Thus, 
Let the time for complete conversion of a particle be 7. Then by taking r, = 0 
in Eq. 8, we find 
The radius of unreacted core in terms of fractional time for complete conversion 
is obtained by combining Eqs. 8 and 9, or 
This can be written in terms of fractional conversion by noting that 


=== PDF PAGE 205 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 573 
Therefore 
Thus we obtain the relationship of time with radius and with conversion, which 
is shown graphically in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 
Diffusion through Ash Layer Controls 
Figure 25.6 illustrates the situation in which the resistance to diffusion through 
the ash controls the rate of reaction. To develop an expression between time 
and radius, such as Eq. 8 for film resistance, requires a two-step analysis. First 
examine a typical partially reacted particle, writing the flux relationships for this 
condition. Then apply this relationship for all values of r,; in other words, inte- 
grate r, between R and 0. 
Consider a partially reacted particle as shown in Fig. 25.6. Both reactant A 
and the boundary of the unreacted core move inward toward the center of the 
particle. But for GIS systems the shrinkage of the unreacted core is slower than 
the flow rate of A toward the unreacted core by a factor of about 1000, which 
is roughly the ratio of densities of solid to gas. Because of this it is reasonable 
for us to assume, in considering the concentration gradient of A in the ash layer 
at any time, that the unreacted core is stationary. 
QAs =flux of A through exterior surface 
of particle (inward +, outward -) 
QA = flux of A through surface 
of any radius r 
QA, =flux of A to the reaction surface 
Typical position in diffusion region 
I '. 
I 
1 
7---- 
T
I
 
I ,Y 
I I 
I 
4 
I 
I 
I
I
 I 
I 
I
I
 I 
Radial position 
Figure 25.6 Representation of a reacting particle when diffusion through the ash 
layer is the controlling resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 206 ===
574 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
With L I S  systems we have a problem because the velocity ratio is closer to unity 
than to 1000. Yoshida et al. (1975) consider a relaxation of the above assumption. 
For GIS systems the use of the steady-state assumption allows great simplifica- 
tion in the mathematics which follows. Thus the rate of reaction of A at any 
instant is given by its rate of diffusion to the reaction surface, or 
-- 
dNA - 
- 4nr2QA = 4rR2Q, = 4rr:QA, = constant 
dt 
(12) 
For convenience, let the flux of A within the ash layer be expressed by Fick's 
law for equimolar counterdiffusion, though other forms of this diffusion equation 
will give the same result. Then, noting that both QA and dCA/dr are positive, 
we have 
where CZje is the effective diffusion coefficient of gaseous reactant in the ash layer. 
Often it is difficult to assign a value beforehand to this quantity because the 
property of the ash (its sintering qualities, for example) can be very sensitive to 
small amounts of impurities in the solid and to small variations in the particle's 
environment. Combining Eqs. 12 and 13, we obtain for any r 
-- 
- 
~ C A  
dNA - 4rr2ge - 
= constant 
dt 
dr 
Integrating across the ash layer form R to r,, we obtain 
This expression represents the conditions of a reacting particle at any time. 
In the second part of the analysis we let the size of unreacted core change 
with time. For a given size of unreacted core, dNA/dt is constant; however, as 
the core shrinks the ash layer becomes thicker, lowering the rate of diffusion of 
A. Consequently, integration of Eq. 15 with respect to time and other variables 
should yield the required relationship. But we note that this equation contains 
three variables, t, NA, and r,, one of which must be eliminated or written in 
terms of the other variables before integration can be performed. As with film 
diffusion, let us eliminate NA by writing it in terms of r,. This relationship is 
given by Eq. 6; hence, replacing in Eq. 15, separating variables, and integrating, 


=== PDF PAGE 207 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 575 
we obtain 
For the complete conversion of a particle, r, = 0, and the time required is 
The progression of reaction in terms of the time required for complete conversion 
is found by dividing Eq. 16 by Eq. 17, or 
t 
3 
- = 1 - 3 ( 2 ) 2 + 2 ( $ )  
T 
which in terms of fractional conversion, as given in Eq. 10, becomes 
t - = 1 - 3(1 - XB)'l3 + 2(1 - xB) 
7 
These results are presented graphically in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 
Chemical Reaction Controls 
Figure 25.7 illustrates concentration gradients within a particle when chemical 
reaction controls. Since the progress of the reaction is unaffected by the presence 
of any ash layer, the rate is proportional to the available surface of unreacted 
core. Thus, based on unit surface of unreacted core, r,, the rate of reaction for 
the stoichiometry of Eqs. 1, 2, and 3 is 
where k is the first-order rate constant for the surface reaction. Writing NB in 
terms of the shrinking radius, as given in Eq. 6, we obtain 


=== PDF PAGE 208 ===
576 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
,---- 
. 
,// Gas film \, 
R 
r, 0 r, 
R 
Radial position 
Figure 25.7 Representation of a reacting particle when chem- 
ical reaction is the controlling resistance, the reaction being 
A(g) + bB(s) --, products. 
which on integration becomes 
The time r required for complete conversion is given when rc = 0, or 
The decrease in radius or increase in fractional conversion of the particle in 
terms of r is found by combining Eqs. 21 and 22. Thus, 
This result is plotted in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 


=== PDF PAGE 209 ===
25.3 Rate of Reaction for Shrinking Spherical Particles 577 
25.3 
RATE OF REACTION FOR SHRINKING SPHERICAL PARTICLES 
When no ash forms, as in the burning of pure carbon in air, the reacting particle 
shrinks during reaction, finally disappearing. This process is illustrated in Fig. 
25.8. For a reaction of this kind we visualize the following three steps occurring 
in succession. 
Step 1. Diffusion of reactant A from the main body of gas through the gas 
film to the surface of the solid. 
Step 2. Reaction on the surface between reactant A and solid. 
Step 3. Diffusion of reaction products from the surface of the solid through 
the gas film back into the main body of gas. Note that the ash layer 
is absent and does not contribute any resistance. 
As with particles of constant size, let us see what rate expressions result when 
one or the other of the resistances controls. 
Chemical Reaction Controls 
When chemical reaction controls, the behavior is identical to that of particles 
of unchanging size; therefore, Fig. 25.7 and Eq. 21 or 23 will represent the 
conversion-time behavior of single particles, both shrinking and of constant size. 
Gas Film Diffusion Controls 
Film resistance at the surface of a particle is dependent on numerous factors, 
such as the relative velocity between particle and fluid, size of particle, and fluid 
properties. These have been correlated for various ways of contacting fluid with 
R 
O
R
 
Radial position 
Figure 25.8 Representation of concentration of reactants and 
products for the reaction A(g) + bB(s) -+ rR(g) between a 
shrinking solid particle and gas. 


=== PDF PAGE 210 ===
578 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
solid, such as packed beds, fluidized beds, and solids in free fall. As an example, 
for mass transfer of a component of mole fraction y in a fluid to free-falling 
solids Froessling (1938) gives 
During reaction a particle changes in size; hence kg also varies. In general kg 
rises for an increase in gas velocity and for smaller particles. As an example, 
Fig. 12 and Eq. 24 show that 
for small d, and u 
kg - - 
dP 
u1/2 
kg - - for large dp and u 
d;I2 
(26) 
Equation 25 represents particles in the Stokes law regime. Let us develop conver- 
sion-time expressions for such particles. 
Stokes Regime (Small Particles). At the time when a particle, originally of size 
R,, has shrunk to size R, we may write 
Thus, analogous to Eq. 7, we have 
Since in the Stokes regime Eq. 24 reduces to 
we have on combining and integrating 


=== PDF PAGE 211 ===
25.4 Extensions 579 
The time for complete disappearance of a particle is thus 
and on combining we obtain 
This relationship of size versus time for shrinking particles in the Stokes regime 
is shown in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583, and it well represents small 
burning solid particles and small burning liquid droplets. 
25.4 EXTENSIONS 
Particles of Different Shape. Conversion-time equations similar to those devel- 
oped above can be obtained for various-shaped particles, and Table 25.1 summa- 
rizes these expressions. 
Combination of Resistances. The above conversion-time expressions assume 
that a single resistance controls throughout reaction of the particle. However, 
the relative importance of the gas film, ash layer, and reaction steps will vary as 
particle conversion progresses. For example, for a constant size particle the gas 
film resistance remains unchanged, the resistance to reaction increases as the 
surface of unreacted core decreases, while the ash layer resistance is nonexistent 
at the start because no ash is present, but becomes progressively more and more 
important as the ash layer builds up. In general, then, it may not be reasonable 
to consider that just one step controls throughout reaction. 
To account for the simultaneous action of these resistances is straightforward 
since they act in series and are all linear in concentration. Thus on combining 
Eqs. 7,15, and 20 with their individual driving forces and eliminating intermediate 
concentrations we can show that the time to reach any stage of conversion is 
the sum of the times needed if each resistance acted alone, or 
ttotal = &lrn alone + tash alone + treaction alone 
Similarly, for complete conversion 
I 
7total = 7film alone + 7ash alone + 7reaction alone 
In an alternative approach, the individual resistances can be combined directly 
to give, at any particular stage of conversion, 


=== PDF PAGE 212 ===


=== PDF PAGE 213 ===
25.4 Extensions 581 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
filn 
ash 
reaction 
As may be seen, the relative importance of the three individual resistances varies 
as conversion progresses, or as r, decreases. 
On considering the whole progression from fresh to completely converted 
constant size particle, we find on the average that the relative roles of these 
three resistances is given by 
For ash-free particles which shrink with reaction, only two resistances, gas film 
and surface reaction, need to be considered. Because these are both based on 
the changing exterior surface of particles, we may combine them to give at 
any instant 
Various forms of these expressions have been derived by Yagi and Kunii (1955), 
Shen and Smith (1965), and White and Carberry (1965). 
Limitations of the Shrinking Core Model. The assumptions of this model may 
not match reality precisely. For example, reaction may occur along a diffuse 
front rather than along a sharp interface between ash and fresh solid, thus giving 
behavior intermediate between the shrinking core and the continuous reaction 
models. This problem is considered by Wen (1968), and Ishida and Wen (1971). 
Also, for fast reaction the rate of heat release may be high enough to cause 
significant temperature gradients within the particles or between particle and 
the bulk fluid. This problem is treated in detail by Wen and Wang (1970). 
Despite these complications Wen (1968) and Ishida et al. (1971), on the basis 
of studies of numerous systems, conclude that the shrinking core model is the 
best simple representation for the majority of reacting gas-solid systems. 
There are, however, two broad classes of exceptions to this conclusion. The 
first comes with the slow reaction of a gas with a very porous solid. Here reaction 
can occur throughout the solid, in which situation the continuous reaction model 
may be expected to better fit reality. An example of this is the slow poisoning 
of a catalyst pellet, a situation treated in Chapter 21. 
The second exception occurs when solid is converted by the action of heat, 
and without needing contact with gas. Baking bread, boiling missionaries, and 


=== PDF PAGE 214 ===
582 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
roasting puppies are mouthwatering examples of such reactions. Here again the 
continuous reaction model is a better representation of reality. Wen (1968) and 
Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) treat these kinetics. 
25.5 DETERMINATION OF THE RATE-CONTROLLING STEP 
The kinetics and rate-controlling steps of a fluid-solid reaction are deduced by 
noting how the progressive conversion of particles is influenced by particle size 
and operating temperature. This information can be obtained in various ways, 
depending on the facilities available and the materials at hand. The following 
observations are a guide to experimentation and to the interpretation of experi- 
mental data. 
Temperature. The chemical step is usually much more temperature-sensitive 
than the physical steps; hence, experiments at different temperatures should 
easily distinguish between ash or film diffusion on the one hand and chemical 
reaction on the other hand as the controlling step. 
Time. Figures 25.9 and 25.10 show the progressive conversion of spherical solids 
when chemical reaction, film diffusion, and ash diffusion in turn control. Results 
of kinetic runs compared with these predicted curves should indicate the rate- 
controlling step. Unfortunately, the difference between ash diffusion and chemi- 
cal reaction as controlling steps is not great and may be masked by the scatter 
in experimental data. 
t/7 
Figure 25.9 Progress of reaction of a single spherical particle 
with surrounding fluid measured in terms of time for com- 
plete reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 215 ===
25.5 Determination of the Rate-Controlling Step 583 
Figure 25.10 Progress of reaction of a single spherical particle 
with surrounding fluid measured in terms of time for com- 
plete conversion. 
Conversion-time curves analogous to those in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10 can be 
prepared for other solid shapes by using the equations of Table 25.1. 
Particle Size. Equations 16, 21, and 8 with Eq. 24 or 25 show that the time 
needed to achieve the same fractional conversion for particles of different but 
unchanging sizes is given by 
t cc R1.5 
to 2.0 
for film diffusion controlling (the exponent drops as 
Reynolds number rises) 
(36) 
t cc R2 
for ash diffusion controlling 
(37) 
tccR 
for chemical reaction controlling 
(38) 
Thus kinetic runs with different sizes of particles can distinguish between reac- 
tions in which the chemical and physical steps control. 
Ash Versus Film Resistance. When a hard solid ash forms during reaction, the 
resistance of gas-phase reactant through this ash is usually much greater than 
through the gas film surrounding the particle. Hence in the presence of a nonflak- 
ing ash layer, film resistance can safely be ignored. In addition, ash resistance is 
unaffected by changes in gas velocity. 
Predictability of Film Resistance. The magnitude of film resistance can be 
estimated from dimensionless correlations such as Eq. 24. Thus an observed rate 
approximately equal to the calculated rate suggests that film resistance controls. 


=== PDF PAGE 216 ===
584 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
t 
Chemical reaction 
step controls 
Temperature (n 
Figure 25.11 Because of the series relationship 
among the resistances to reaction, the net or ob- 
served rate is never higher than for any of the 
individual steps acting alone. 
Overall Versus Individual Resistance. If a plot of individual rate coefficients 
is made as a function of temperature, as shown in Fig. 25.11, the overall coefficient 
given by Eq. 34 or 35 cannot be higher than any of the individual coefficients. 
With these observations we can usually discover with a small, carefully planned 
experimental program which is the controlling mechanism. 
Let us illustrate the interplay of resistances with the well-studied gas-solid 
reaction of pure carbon particles with oxygen: 
C + 0, + co, 
[B(s) + A(g) +gaseous products] 
with rate equation 
Since no ash is formed at any time during reaction, we have here a case of 
kinetics of shrinking particles for which two resistances at most, surface reaction 
and gas film, may play a role. In terms of these, the overall rate constant at any 
instant from Eq. 35 is 


=== PDF PAGE 217 ===
25.5 Determination of the Rate-Controlling Step 585 
Figure 25.12 Rate of combustion of pure carbon particles; this figure 
is adapted from Yagi and Kunii (1955). 
kg is given by Eq. 24, while k" is given by the following expression of Parker 
and Hottel (1936): 
where R is in J/mol.K, T is in kelvin, and C, 
is in gram moles per liter. 
Figure 25.12 shows all this information in convenient graphical form and allows 
determination of a" for different values of the system variables. Note that when 
film resistance controls, the reaction is rather temperature insensitive but is 
dependent on particle size and relative velocity between solid and gas. This is 
shown by the family of lines, close to parallel and practically horizontal. 


=== PDF PAGE 218 ===
586 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
In extrapolating to new untried operating conditions, we must know when to 
be prepared for a change in controlling step and when we may reasonably expect 
the rate-controlling step not to change. For example, for particles with nonflaking 
ash a rise in temperature and to a lesser extent an increase in particle size may 
cause the rate to switch from reaction to ash diffusion controlling. For reactions 
in which ash is not present, a rise in temperature will cause a shift from reaction 
to film resistance controlling. 
On the other hand, if ash diffusion already controls, then a rise in temperature 
should not cause it to shift to reaction control or film diffusion control. 
REFERENCES 
Froessling, N., Gerland Beitr. Geophys., 52, 170 (1938). 
Ishida, M., and Wen, C. Y., Chem. Eng. Sci., 26, 1031 (1971). 
Ishida, M., Wen, C. Y., and Shirai, T., Chem. Eng. Sci., 26, 1043 (1971). 
Kunii, D., and Levenspiel, O., Fluidization Engineering, 2nd edition, Butterworth, Boston, 
MA, 1991. 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Parker, A. L., and Hottel, H. C., Znd. Eng. Chem., 28, 1334 (1936). 
Shen, J., and Smith, J. M., Znd. Eng. Chem. Fund., 4,293 (1965). 
Wen, C. Y., Znd. Eng. Chem., 60 (9), 34 (1968). 
Wen, C. Y., and Wang, S. C., Znd. Eng. Chem., 62 (8), 30 (1970). 
White, D. E., and Carberry, J. J., Can. J. Chem. Eng., 43, 334 (1965). 
Yagi, S., and Kunii, D., 5th Symposium (International) on Combustion, Reinhold, New 
York, 1955, p. 231; Chem. Eng. (Japan), 19,500 (1955). 
Yagi, S., and Kunii, D., Chem. Eng. Sci., 16, 364, 372, 380 (1961). 
Yoshida, K., Kunii, D., and Shimizu, F. J., Chem. Eng. (Japan), 8,417 (1975). 
PROBLEMS 
25.1. A batch of solids of uniform size is treated by gas in a uniform environ- 
ment. Solid is converted to give a nonflaking product according to the 
shrinking-core model. Conversion is about $ for a reaction time of 1 h, 
conversion is complete in two hours. What mechanism is rate controlling? 
25.2. In a shady spot at the end of Brown Street in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, 
stands a Civil War memorial-a 
brass general, a brass cannon which 
persistent undergraduate legend insists may still fire some day, and a stack 
of iron cannonballs. At the time this memorial was set up, 1868, the 
cannonballs were 30 inches in circumference. Today due to weathering, 
rusting, and the once-a-decade steel wire scrubbing by the DCW, the 
cannonballs are only 29.75 in. in circumference. Approximately, when will 
they disappear completely? 
25.3. Calculate the time needed to burn to completion particles of graphite 
(R, = 5 mm, p, = 2.2 gm/cm3, k" = 20 cmlsec) in an 8% oxygen stream. 


=== PDF PAGE 219 ===
Problems 587 
For the high gas velocity used assume that film diffusion does not offer 
any resistance to transfer and reaction. Reaction temperature = 900°C. 
25.4. Spherical particles of zinc blende of size R = 1 mm are roasted in an 8% 
oxygen stream at 900°C and 1 atm. The stoichiometry of the reaction is 
Assuming that reaction proceeds by the shrinking-core model calculate 
the time needed for complete conversion of a particle and the relative 
resistance of ash layer diffusion during this operation. 
Data 
Density of solid, p, = 4.13 gm/cm3 = 0.0425 mol/cm3 
Reaction rate constant, k" = 2 cmlsec 
For gases in the ZnO layer, 9 j e  = 0.08 cm2/sec 
Note that film resistance can safely be neglected as long as a growing ash 
layer is present. 
On doubling the particle size from R to 2R the time for complete conver- 
sion triples. What is the contribution of ash diffusion to the overall resis- 
tance for particles of size 
Spherical solid particles containing B are roasted isothermally in an oven 
with gas of constant composition. Solids are converted to a firm nonflaking 
product according to the SCM as follows: 
From the following conversion data (by chemical analysis) or core size 
data (by slicing and measuring) determine the rate controlling mechanism 
for the transformation of solid. 
25.7. dp , mm 
XB 
t, min 
25.8. d, 
XB 
t, sec 
1 
1 
4 
1 
0.3 
2 
1.5 
1 
6 
1 
0.75 
5 
25.9. dp, mm 
XB 
t, sec 
25.10. d,, 
XB 
t, sec 
1 
1 
200 
2 
0.875 
1 
1.5 
1 
450 
1 
1 
1 


=== PDF PAGE 220 ===
588 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
25.11. Uniform-sized spherical particles UO, are reduced to UO, in a uniform 
environment with the following results: 
If reaction follows the SCM, find the controlling mechanism and a rate 
equation to represent this reduction. 
25.12. A large stockpile of coal is burning. Every part of its surface is in flames. 
In a 24-hr period the linear size of the pile, as measured by its silhouette 
against the horizon, seems to decrease by about 5%. 
(a) How should the burning mass decrease in size? 
(b) When should the fire burn itself out? 
(c) State the assumptions on which your estimation is based. 


=== PDF PAGE 221 ===
Chapter 26 
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Three factors control the design of a fluid-solid reactor; the reaction kinetics 
for single particles, the size distribution of solids being treated, and the flow 
patterns of solids and fluid in the reactor. Where the kinetics are complex and 
not well known, where the products of reaction form a blanketing fluid phase, 
where temperature within the system varies greatly from position to position, 
analysis of the situation becomes difficult and present design is based largely on 
the experiences gained by many years of operations, innovation, and small 
changes made on existing reactors. The blast furnace for producing iron is proba- 
bly the most important industrial example of such a system. 
Though some real industrial reactions may never yield to simple analysis, this 
should not deter us from studying idealized systems. These satisfactorily represent 
many real systems and in addition may be taken as the starting point for more 
involved analyses. Here we consider only the greatly simplified idealized systems 
in which the reaction kinetics, flow characteristics, and size distribution of solids 
are known. 
Referring to Fig. 26.1, let us discuss briefly the various types of contacting in 
gas-solid operations. 
Solids and Gas Both in Plug Flow. When solids and gas pass through the 
reactor in plug flow, their compositions change during passage. In addition, such 
operations are usually nonisothermal. 
The plug flow contacting of phases may be accomplished in many ways: by 
countercurrent flow as in blast furnaces and cement kilns [Fig. 26.l(a)], by cross- 
flow as in moving belt feeders for furnaces [Fig. 26.l(b)], or by cocurrent flow 
as in polymer driers [Fig. 26.l(c)]. 
Solids in Mixed Flow. The fluidized bed [Fig. 26.l(d)] is the best example of 
a reactor with mixed flow of solids. The gas flow in such reactors is difficult to 
characterize and often is worse than mixed flow. Because of the high heat capacity 
of the solids, isothermal conditions can frequently be assumed in such operations. 
Semibatch Operations. The ion exchange column of Fig. 26.l(e) is an example 
of the batch treatment of solids in which the flow of fluid closely approximates 


=== PDF PAGE 222 ===
590 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Air 
(a) Blast furnace 
a- 
Air 
(b) Moving feeder for 
coal furnaces 
Hot gas 
t 
Product 
(c) Rotary dryer for heat-sensitive materials 
Fluid in 
Solids in 
Bed of 
solids 
Fluid out 
(d) Fluidized-bed reactor 
(e) Ion exchange bed 
Figure 26.1 Various contacting patterns in fluid-solid reactors: (a-d) 
countercurrent, crosscurrent, and cocurrent plug flow; ( d )  intermediate 
gas flow, mixed solid flow; (e) semibatch operations. 
the ideal of plug flow. On the contrary, an ordinary home fireplace, another 
semibatch operation, has a flow which is difficult to characterize. 
Batch Operations. The reaction and dissolution of a batch of solid in a batch of 
fluid, such as the acid attack of a solid, is a common example of batch operations. 
Analysis and design of fluid-solid systems are greatly simplified if the composi- 


=== PDF PAGE 223 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 591 
tion of the fluid can be considered to be uniform throughout the reactor. Since 
this is a reasonable approximation where fractional conversion of fluid-phase 
reactants is not too great, where fluid backmixing is considerable, or where 
solids wander about the reactor, sampling all the fluid as in fluidized beds, this 
assumption frequently can be used without deviating too greatly from reality. 
We use this assumption in the analyses that follow. 
We then conclude this chapter with a brief treatment of extremely fast reactions 
which are representative of some combustions. Here the analysis simplifies con- 
siderably, since the kinetics do not enter the picture. 
Let us now turn to a number of frequently met contacting patterns, and let 
us develop their performance equations, employing in every case the assumptions 
of uniform gas composition within the reactor. 
Particles of a Single Size, Plug Flow of Solids, Uniform Gas Composition 
The contact time or reaction time needed for any specific conversion of solid is 
found directly from the equations of Table 25.1. 
Mixture of Particles of Different but Unchanging Sizes, Plug Flow of Solids, 
Uniform Gas Composition 
Consider a solid feed consisting of a mixture of different-size particles. The size 
distribution of this feed can be represented either as a continuous distribution 
or as a discrete distribution. We use the latter representation because screen 
analysis, our way of measuring size distributions, gives discrete measurements. 
Let F be the quantity of solid being treated in unit time. Since the density of 
solid may change during reaction, F is defined as the volumetric feed rate of 
solid in the general case. Where density change of the solid is negligible, F can 
represent the mass feed rate of solid as well. In addition, let F(R,) be the quantity 
of material of size about Ri fed to the reactor. If R, is the largest particle size 
in the feed, we have for particles of unchanging size 
Figure 26.2 shows the general characteristics of a discrete size distribution. 
When in plug flow all solids stay in the reactor for the same length of time t,. 
From this and the kinetics for whatever resistance controls, the conversion XB(Ri) 
for any size of particle Ri can be found. Then the mean conversion xB 
of the 
solids leaving the reactor can be obtained by properly summing to find the overall 
contribution to conversion of all sizes of particles. Thus, 
mean value for 
fraction of reactant 
fraction of 
(the fraction of) = 2. ( B unconverted in 
feed which is 
(1) 
I3 unconverted 
allsizes 
particles of size Ri )( of size Ri ) 
