
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Chemical 
Reaction 
Engineering 
Third Edition 
Octave Levenspiel 
Department of Chemical Engineering 
Oregon State University 
John Wiley & Sons 
New York Chichester Weinheim Brisbane Singapore Toronto 


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
ACQUISITIONS EDITOR 
Wayne Anderson 
MARKETING MANAGER 
Katherine Hepburn 
PRODUCTION EDITOR 
Ken Santor 
SENIOR DESIGNER 
Kevin Murphy 
ILLUSTRATION COORDINATOR 
Jaime Perea 
ILLUSTRATION 
Wellington Studios 
COVER DESIGN 
Bekki Levien 
This book was set in Times Roman by Bi-Comp Inc. and printed and bound by the 
Hamilton Printing Company. The cover was printed by Phoenix Color Corporation. 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
The paper in this book was manufactured by a mill whose forest management programs 
include sustained yield harvesting of its timberlands. Sustained yield harvesting principles 
ensure that the numbers of trees cut each year does not exceed the amount of new growth. 
Copyright O 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning 
or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States 
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or 
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright 
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (508) 750-8400, fax 
(508) 750-4470. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 
10158-0012, (212) 850-6011, fax (212) 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data: 
Levenspiel, Octave. 
Chemical reaction engineering 1 Octave Levenspiel. - 
3rd ed. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-471-25424-X (cloth : alk. paper) 
1. Chemical reactors. 
I. Title. 
TP157.L4 1999 
6601.281-dc21 
97-46872 
CIP 
Printed in the United States of America 


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
Preface 
Chemical reaction engineering is that engineering activity concerned with the 
exploitation of chemical reactions on a commercial scale. Its goal is the successful 
design and operation of chemical reactors, and probably more than any other 
activity it sets chemical engineering apart as a distinct branch of the engi- 
neering profession. 
In a typical situation the engineer is faced with a host of questions: what 
information is needed to attack a problem, how best to obtain it, and then how 
to select a reasonable design from the many available alternatives? The purpose 
of this book is to teach how to answer these questions reliably and wisely. To 
do this I emphasize qualitative arguments, simple design methods, graphical 
procedures, and frequent comparison of capabilities of the major reactor types. 
This approach should help develop a strong intuitive sense for good design which 
can then guide and reinforce the formal methods. 
This is a teaching book; thus, simple ideas are treated first, and are then 
extended to the more complex. Also, emphasis is placed throughout on the 
development of a common design strategy for all systems, homogeneous and 
heterogeneous. 
This is an introductory book. The pace is leisurely, and where needed, time is 
taken to consider why certain assumptions are made, to discuss why an alternative 
approach is not used, and to indicate the limitations of the treatment when 
applied to real situations. Although the mathematical level is not particularly 
difficult (elementary calculus and the linear first-order differential equation is 
all that is needed), this does not mean that the ideas and concepts being taught 
are particularly simple. To develop new ways of thinking and new intuitions is 
not easy. 
Regarding this new edition: first of all I should say that in spirit it follows the 
earlier ones, and I try to keep things simple. In fact, I have removed material 
from here and there that I felt more properly belonged in advanced books. 
But I have added a number of new topics-biochemical 
systems, reactors with 
fluidized solids, gadliquid reactors, and more on nonideal flow. The reason for 
this is my feeling that students should at least be introduced to these subjects so 
that they will have an idea of how to approach problems in these important areas. 
iii 


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
i~ 
Preface 
I feel that problem-solving-the process of applying concepts to new situa- 
tions-is 
essential to learning. Consequently this edition includes over 80 illustra- 
tive examples and over 400 problems (75% new) to help the student learn and 
understand the concepts being taught. 
This new edition is divided into five parts. For the first undergraduate course, 
I would suggest covering Part 1 (go through Chapters 1 and 2 quickly-don't 
dawdle there), and if extra time is available, go on to whatever chapters in Parts 
2 to 5 that are of interest. For me, these would be catalytic systems (just Chapter 
18) and a bit on nonideal flow (Chapters 11 and 12). 
For the graduate or second course the material in Parts 2 to 5 should be suitable. 
Finally, I'd like to acknowledge Professors Keith Levien, Julio Ottino, and 
Richard Turton, and Dr. Amos Avidan, who have made useful and helpful 
comments. Also, my grateful thanks go to Pam Wegner and Peggy Blair, who 
typed and retyped-probably 
what seemed like ad infiniturn-to get this manu- 
script ready for the publisher. 
And to you, the reader, if you find errors-no, 
when you find errors-or 
sections of this book that are unclear, please let me know. 
Octave Levenspiel 
Chemical Engineering Department 
Oregon State University 
Corvallis, OR, 97331 
Fax: (541) 737-4600 


=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
Contents 
Notation /xi 
Chapter 1 
Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering I1 
Part I 
Homogeneous Reactions in Ideal 
Reactors I11 
Chapter 2 
Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions I13 
2.1 Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation I14 
2.2 Temperature-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation I27 
2.3 Searching for a Mechanism 129 
2.4 Predictability of Reaction Rate from Theory 132 
Chapter 3 
Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
I38 
3.1 Constant-volume Batch Reactor 139 
3.2 Varying-volume Batch Reactor 167 
3.3 Temperature and Reaction Rate 172 
3.4 The Search for a Rate Equation I75 
Chapter 4 
Introduction to Reactor Design 183 


=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
vi 
Contents 
Chapter 5 
Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 190 
5.1 Ideal Batch Reactors I91 
52. Steady-State Mixed Flow Reactors 194 
5.3 Steady-State Plug Flow Reactors 1101 
Chapter 6 
Design for Single Reactions I120 
6.1 Size Comparison of Single Reactors 1121 
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems 1124 
6.3 Recycle Reactor 1136 
6.4 Autocatalytic Reactions 1140 
Chapter 7 
Design for Parallel Reactions 1152 
Chapter 8 
Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 1170 
8.1 Irreversible First-Order Reactions in Series 1170 
8.2 First-Order Followed by Zero-Order Reaction 1178 
8.3 Zero-Order Followed by First-Order Reaction 1179 
8.4 Successive Irreversible Reactions of Different Orders 1180 
8.5 Reversible Reactions 1181 
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 1181 
8.7 The Denbigh Reaction and its Special Cases 1194 
Chapter 9 
Temperature and Pressure Effects 1207 
9.1 Single Reactions 1207 
9.2 Multiple Reactions 1235 
Chapter 10 
Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 1240 
Part I1 
Flow Patterns, Contacting, and Non-Ideal 
Flow I255 
Chapter 11 
Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 1257 
11.1 E, the Age Distribution of Fluid, the RTD 1260 
11.2 Conversion in Non-Ideal Flow Reactors 1273 


=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
Contents Yii 
Chapter 12 
Compartment Models 1283 
Chapter 13 
The Dispersion Model 1293 
13.1 Axial Dispersion 1293 
13.2 Correlations for Axial Dispersion 1309 
13.3 Chemical Reaction and Dispersion 1312 
Chapter 14 
The Tanks-in-Series Model 1321 
14.1 Pulse Response Experiments and the RTD 1321 
14.2 Chemical Conversion 1328 
Chapter 15 
The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 1339 
15.1 The Convection Model and its RTD 1339 
15.2 Chemical Conversion in Laminar Flow Reactors 1345 
Chapter 16 
Earliness of Mixing, Segregation and RTD 1350 
16.1 Self-mixing of a Single Fluid 1350 
16.2 Mixing of Two Miscible Fluids 1361 
Part 111 
Reactions Catalyzed by Solids 1367 
Chapter 17 
Heterogeneous Reactions - Introduction 1369 
Chapter 18 
Solid Catalyzed Reactions 1376 
18.1 The Rate Equation for Surface Kinetics 1379 
18.2 Pore Diffusion Resistance Combined with Surface Kinetics 1381 
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles I385 
18.4 Heat Effects During Reaction 
1391 
18.5 Performance Equations for Reactors Containing Porous Catalyst 
Particles 1393 
18.6 Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 1396 
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 1402 


=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
viii 
Contents 
Chapter 19 
The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 1427 
Chapter 20 
Reactors with Suspended Solid Catalyst, 
Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 1447 
20.1 Background Information About Suspended Solids Reactors 1447 
20.2 The Bubbling Fluidized Bed-BFB 
1451 
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 1445 
20.4 The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 
1465 
20.5 The Jet Impact Reactor 1470 
Chapter 21 
Deactivating Catalysts 1473 
21.1 Mechanisms of Catalyst Deactivation 
1474 
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 1475 
21.3 Design 1489 
Chapter 22 
GIL Reactions on Solid Catalyst: Trickle Beds, Slurry 
Reactors, Three-Phase Fluidized Beds 1500 
22.1 The General Rate Equation 1500 
22.2 Performanc Equations for an Excess of B 1503 
22.3 Performance Equations for an Excess of A 1509 
22.4 Which Kind of Contactor to Use 1509 
22.5 Applications 1510 
Part IV 
Non-Catalytic Systems I521 
Chapter 23 
Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics I523 
23.1 The Rate Equation 1524 
Chapter 24 
Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 1.540 
24.1 Straight Mass Transfer 1543 
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 1546 
Chapter 25 
Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 1566 
25.1 Selection of a Model 1568 
25.2 Shrinking Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging 
Size 1570 


=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
Contents ix 
25.3 
Rate of Reaction for Shrinking Spherical Particles 1577 
25.4 
Extensions 1579 
25.5 
Determination of the Rate-Controlling Step 1582 
Chapter 26 
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 1589 
Part V 
Biochemical Reaction Systems I609 
Chapter 27 
Enzyme Fermentation 1611 
27.1 Michaelis-Menten Kinetics (M-M kinetics) 1612 
27.2 
Inhibition by a Foreign Substance-Competitive 
and 
Noncompetitive Inhibition 1616 
Chapter 28 
Microbial Fermentation-Introduction and Overall 
Picture 1623 
Chapter 29 
Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 1630 
29.1 Batch (or Plug Flow) Fermentors 1630 
29.2 
Mixed Flow Fermentors 1633 
29.3 
Optimum Operations of Fermentors 1636 
Chapter 30 
Product-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 1645 
30.1 Batch or Plus Flow Fermentors for n = 1 I646 
30.2 Mixed Flow Fermentors for n = 1 1647 
Appendix 1655 
Name Index 1662 
Subject Index 1665 


=== PDF PAGE 10 ===


=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
Notation 
Symbols and constants which are defined and used locally are not included here. 
SI units are given to show the dimensions of the symbols. 
interfacial area per unit volume of tower (m2/m3), see 
Chapter 23 
activity of a catalyst, see Eq. 21.4 
a , b  ,..., 7,s ,... 
stoichiometric coefficients for reacting substances A, 
B, ..., R, s, .,. 
A 
cross sectional area of a reactor (m2), see Chapter 20 
A, B, ... 
reactants 
A, B, C, D, 
Geldart classification of particles, see Chapter 20 
C 
concentration (mol/m3) 
CM 
Monod constant (mol/m3), see Chapters 28-30; or Michae- 
lis constant (mol/m3), see Chapter 27 
c~ 
heat capacity (J/mol.K) 
CLA, C ~ A  
mean specific heat of feed, and of completely converted 
product stream, per mole of key entering reactant (J/ 
mol A + all else with it) 
d 
diameter (m) 
d 
order of deactivation, see Chapter 22 
dimensionless particle diameter, see Eq. 20.1 
axial dispersion coefficient for flowing fluid (m2/s), see 
Chapter 13 
molecular diffusion coefficient (m2/s) 
ge 
effective diffusion coefficient in porous structures (m3/m 
solids) 
ei(x) 
an exponential integral, see Table 16.1 
xi 


=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
~ i i  
Notation 
E, E*, E** 
Eoo, Eoc? ECO, Ecc 
Ei(x) 
8 
f 
A 
F 
F 
G* 
h 
h 
H 
H 
k 
k, kt, II', k ,  k"" 
enhancement factor for mass transfer with reaction, see 
Eq. 23.6 
concentration of enzyme (mol or gm/m3), see Chapter 27 
dimensionless output to a pulse input, the exit age distribu- 
tion function (s-l), see Chapter 11 
RTD for convective flow, see Chapter 15 
RTD for the dispersion model, see Chapter 13 
an exponential integral, see Table 16.1 
effectiveness factor (-), see Chapter 18 
fraction of solids (m3 solid/m3 vessel), see Chapter 20 
volume fraction of phase i (-), see Chapter 22 
feed rate (molls or kgls) 
dimensionless output to a step input (-), see Fig. 11.12 
free energy (Jlmol A) 
heat transfer coefficient (W/m2.K), see Chapter 18 
height of absorption column (m), see Chapter 24 
height of fluidized reactor (m), see Chapter 20 
phase distribution coefficient or Henry's law constant; for 
gas phase systems H = plC (Pa.m3/mol), see Chapter 23 
mean enthalpy of the flowing stream per mole of A flowing 
(Jlmol A + all else with it), see Chapter 9 
enthalpy of unreacted feed stream, and of completely con- 
verted product stream, per mole of A (Jlmol A + all 
else), see Chapter 19 
heat of reaction at temperature T for the stoichiometry 
as written (J) 
heat or enthalpy change of reaction, of formation, and of 
combustion (J or Jlmol) 
reaction rate constant (mol/m3)'-" s-l, see Eq. 2.2 
reaction rate constants based on r, r', J', J", J"', see Eqs. 
18.14 to 18.18 
rate constant for the deactivation of catalyst, see Chap- 
ter 21 
effective thermal conductivity (Wlrn-K), see Chapter 18 
mass transfer coefficient of the gas film (mol/m2.Pa.s), see 
Eq. 23.2 
mass transfer coefficient of the liquid film (m3 liquid/m2 
 surface.^), see Eq. 23.3 
equilibrium constant of a reaction for the stoichiometry 
as written (-), see Chapter 9 


=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
Notation xiii 
Q 
r, r', J', J", J"' 
rc 
R 
R, S, ... 
R 
bubble-cloud interchange coefficient in fluidized beds 
(s-l), see Eq. 20.13 
cloud-emulsion interchange coefficient in fluidized beds 
(s-I), see Eq. 20.14 
characteristic size of a porous catalyst particle (m), see 
Eq. 18.13 
half thickness of a flat plate particle (m), see Table 25.1 
mass flow rate (kgls), see Eq. 11.6 
mass (kg), see Chapter 11 
order of reaction, see Eq. 2.2 
number of equal-size mixed flow reactors in series, see 
Chapter 6 
moles of component A 
partial pressure of component A (Pa) 
partial pressure of A in gas which would be in equilibrium 
with CA in the liquid; hence pz = HACA (Pa) 
heat duty (J/s = W) 
rate of reaction, an intensive measure, see Eqs. 1.2 to 1.6 
radius of unreacted core (m), see Chapter 25 
radius of particle (m), see Chapter 25 
products of reaction 
ideal gas law constant, 
= 8.314 J1mol.K 
= 1.987 cal1mol.K 
= 0.08206 lit.atm/mol.K 
recycle ratio, see Eq. 6.15 
space velocity (s-l); see Eqs. 5.7 and 5.8 
surface (m2) 
time (s) 
= Vlv, reactor holding time or mean residence time of 
fluid in a flow reactor (s), see Eq. 5.24 
temperature (K or "C) 
dimensionless velocity, see Eq. 20.2 
carrier or inert component in a phase, see Chapter 24 
volumetric flow rate (m3/s) 
volume (m3) 
mass of solids in the reactor (kg) 
fraction of A converted, the conversion (-) 


=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
X ~ V  Notation 
x 
A 
moles Almoles inert in the liquid (-), see Chapter 24 
y A 
moles Aimoles inert in the gas (-), see Chapter 24 
Greek symbols 
a 
m3 wake/m3 bubble, see Eq. 20.9 
S 
volume fraction of bubbles in a BFB 
6 
Dirac delta function, an ideal pulse occurring at time t = 
0 (s-I), see Eq. 11.14 
a(t - to) 
Dirac delta function occurring at time to (s-l) 
&A 
expansion factor, fractional volume change on complete 
conversion of A, see Eq. 3.64 
E 
8 
8 = tl? 
K"' 
void fraction in a gas-solid system, see Chapter 20 
effectiveness factor, see Eq. 18.11 
dimensionless time units (-), see Eq. 11.5 
overall reaction rate constant in BFB (m3 solid/m3 gases), 
see Chapter 20 
viscosity of fluid (kg1m.s) 
mean of a tracer output curve, (s), see Chapter 15 
total pressure (Pa) 
density or molar density (kg/m3 or mol/m3) 
variance of a tracer curve or distribution function (s2), see 
Eq. 13.2 
V/v = CAoV/FAo, 
space-time (s), see Eqs. 5.6 and 5.8 
time for complete conversion of a reactant particle to 
product (s) 
= CAoW/FAo, 
weight-time, (kg.s/m3), see Eq. 15.23 
TI, ?", P, T'"' 
various measures of reactor performance, see Eqs. 
18.42, 18.43 
@ 
overall fractional yield, see Eq. 7.8 
4 
sphericity, see Eq. 20.6 
P 
instantaneous fractional yield, see Eq. 7.7 
p(MIN) = @ 
instantaneous fractional yield of M with respect to N, or 
moles M formedlmol N formed or reacted away, see 
Chapter 7 
Symbols and abbreviations 
BFB 
bubbling fluidized bed, see Chapter 20 
BR 
batch reactor, see Chapters 3 and 5 
CFB 
circulating fluidized bed, see Chapter 20 
FF 
fast fluidized bed, see Chapter 20 


=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
Notation XV 
LFR 
MFR 
M-M 
@ = (p(M1N) 
mw 
PC 
PCM 
PFR 
RTD 
SCM 
TB 
Subscripts 
b 
b 
C 
Superscripts 
a, b, . . . 
n 
0 
laminar flow reactor, see Chapter 15 
mixed flow reactor, see Chapter 5 
Michaelis Menten, see Chapter 27 
see Eqs. 28.1 to 28.4 
molecular weight (kglmol) 
pneumatic conveying, see Chapter 20 
progressive conversion model, see Chapter 25 
plug flow reactor, see Chapter 5 
residence time distribution, see Chapter 11 
shrinking-core model, see Chapter 25 
turbulent fluidized bed, see Chapter 20 
batch 
bubble phase of a fluidized bed 
of combustion 
cloud phase of a fluidized bed 
at unreacted core 
deactivation 
deadwater, or stagnant fluid 
emulsion phase of a fluidized bed 
equilibrium conditions 
leaving or final 
of formation 
of gas 
entering 
of liquid 
mixed flow 
at minimum fluidizing conditions 
plug flow 
reactor or of reaction 
solid or catalyst or surface conditions 
entering or reference 
using dimensionless time units, see Chapter 11 
order of reaction, see Eq. 2.2 
order of reaction 
refers to the standard state 


=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
X V ~  Notation 
Dimensionless 
groups 
D - 
vessel dispersion number, see Chapter 13 
uL 
intensity of dispersion number, see Chapter 13 
Hatta modulus, see Eq. 23.8 andlor Figure 23.4 
Thiele modulus, see Eq. 18.23 or 18.26 
Wagner-Weisz-Wheeler modulus, see Eq. 18.24 or 18.34 
dup 
Re = - 
Reynolds number 
P 
P 
Sc = - 
Schmidt number 
~g 


=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
Chapter 1 
Overview of Chemical Reaction 
Engineering 
Every industrial chemical process is designed to produce economically a desired 
product from a variety of starting materials through a succession of treatment 
steps. Figure 1.1 shows a typical situation. The raw materials undergo a number 
of physical treatment steps to put them in the form in which they can be reacted 
chemically. Then they pass through the reactor. The products of the reaction 
must then undergo further physical treatment-separations, 
purifications, etc.- 
for the final desired product to be obtained. 
Design of equipment for the physical treatment steps is studied in the unit 
operations. In this book we are concerned with the chemical treatment step of 
a process. Economically this may be an inconsequential unit, perhaps a simple 
mixing tank. Frequently, however, the chemical treatment step is the heart of 
the process, the thing that makes or breaks the process economically. 
Design of the reactor is no routine matter, and many alternatives can be 
proposed for a process. In searching for the optimum it is not just the cost of 
the reactor that must be minimized. One design may have low reactor cost, but 
the materials leaving the unit may be such that their treatment requires a much 
higher cost than alternative designs. Hence, the economics of the overall process 
must be considered. 
Reactor design uses information, knowledge, and experience from a variety 
of areas-thermodynamics, 
chemical kinetics, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, 
mass transfer, and economics. Chemical reaction engineering is the synthesis of 
all these factors with the aim of properly designing a chemical reactor. 
To find what a reactor is able to do we need to know the kinetics, the contacting 
pattern and the performance equation. We show this schematically in Fig. 1.2. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
Recycle 
Figure 1.1 Typical chemical process. 


=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
2 
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 
Peformance equation 
relates input to output 
contacting pattern or how 
Kinetics or how fast things happen. 
materials flow through and 
If very fast, then equilibrium tells 
contact each other in the reactor, 
what will leave the reactor. If not 
how early or late they mix, their 
so fast, then the rate of chemical 
clumpiness or state of aggregation. 
reaction, and maybe heat and mass 
By their very nature some materials 
transfer too, will determine what will 
are very clumpy-for 
instance, solids 
happen. 
and noncoalescing liquid droplets. 
Figure 1.2 Information needed to predict what a reactor can do. 
Much of this book deals with finding the expression to relate input to output 
for various kinetics and various contacting patterns, or 
output = f [input, kinetics, contacting] 
(1) 
This is called the performance equation. Why is this important? Because with 
this expression we can compare different designs and conditions, find which is 
best, and then scale up to larger units. 
Classification of Reactions 
There are many ways of classifying chemical reactions. In chemical reaction 
engineering probably the most useful scheme is the breakdown according to 
the number and types of phases involved, the big division being between the 
homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. A reaction is homogeneous if it takes 
place in one phase alone. A reaction is heterogeneous if it requires the presence 
of at least two phases to proceed at the rate that it does. It is immaterial whether 
the reaction takes place in one, two, or more phases; at an interface; or whether 
the reactants and products are distributed among the phases or are all contained 
within a single phase. All that counts is that at least two phases are necessary 
for the reaction to proceed as it does. 
Sometimes this classification is not clear-cut as with the large class of biological 
reactions, the enzyme-substrate reactions. Here the enzyme acts as a catalyst in 
the manufacture of proteins and other products. Since enzymes themselves are 
highly complicated large-molecular-weight proteins of colloidal size, 10-100 nm, 
enzyme-containing solutions represent a gray region between homogeneous and 
heterogeneous systems. Other examples for which the distinction between homo- 
geneous and heterogeneous systems is not sharp are the very rapid chemical 
reactions, such as the burning gas flame. Here large nonhomogeneity in composi- 
tion and temperature exist. Strictly speaking, then, we do not have a single phase, 
for a phase implies uniform temperature, pressure, and composition throughout. 
The answer to the question of how to classify these borderline cases is simple. 
It depends on how we choose to treat them, and this in turn depends on which 


=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 3 
Table 1.1 Classification of Chemical Reactions Useful in Reactor Design 
Noncatalytic 
Catalytic 
Homogeneous 
------------ 
Heterogeneous 
Most gas-phase reactions 
..................... 
Fast reactions such as 
burning of a flame 
..................... 
Burning of coal 
Roasting of ores 
Attack of solids by acids 
Gas-liquid absorption 
with reaction 
Reduction of iron ore to 
iron and steel 
Most liquid-phase reactions 
.......................... 
Reactions in colloidal systems 
Enzyme and microbial reactions 
.......................... 
Ammonia synthesis 
Oxidation of ammonia to pro- 
duce nitric acid 
Cracking of crude oil 
Oxidation of SO2 to SO3 
description we think is more useful. Thus, only in the context of a given situation 
can we decide how best to treat these borderline cases. 
Cutting across this classification is the catalytic reaction whose rate is altered 
by materials that are neither reactants nor products. These foreign materials, 
called catalysts, need not be present in large amounts. Catalysts act somehow as 
go-betweens, either hindering or accelerating the reaction process while being 
modified relatively slowly if at all. 
Table 1.1 shows the classification of chemical reactions according to our scheme 
with a few examples of typical reactions for each type. 
Variables Affecting the Rate of Reaction 
Many variables may affect the rate of a chemical reaction. In homogeneous 
systems the temperature, pressure, and composition are obvious variables. In 
heterogeneous systems more than one phase is involved; hence, the problem 
becomes more complex. Material may have to move from phase to phase during 
reaction; hence, the rate of mass transfer can become important. For example, 
in the burning of a coal briquette the diffusion of oxygen through the gas film 
surrounding the particle, and through the ash layer at the surface of the particle, 
can play an important role in limiting the rate of reaction. In addition, the rate 
of heat transfer may also become a factor. Consider, for example, an exothermic 
reaction taking place at the interior surfaces of a porous catalyst pellet. If the 
heat released by reaction is not removed fast enough, a severe nonuniform 
temperature distribution can occur within the pellet, which in turn will result in 
differing point rates of reaction. These heat and mass transfer effects become 
increasingly important the faster the rate of reaction, and in very fast reactions, 
such as burning flames, they become rate controlling. Thus, heat and mass transfer 
may play important roles in determining the rates of heterogeneous reactions. 
Definition of Reaction Rate 
We next ask how to define the rate of reaction in meaningful and useful ways. 
To answer this, let us adopt a number of definitions of rate of reaction, all 


=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
4 
Chapter I Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 
interrelated and all intensive rather than extensive measures. But first we must 
select one reaction component for consideration and define the rate in terms of 
this component i. If the rate of change in number of moles of this component 
due to reaction is dN,ldt, then the rate of reaction in its various forms is defined 
as follows. Based on unit volume of reacting fluid, 
1 dNi 
y. = -
=
 moles i formed 
V 
dt 
(volume of fluid) (time) 
Based on unit mass of solid in fluid-solid systems, 
""""i,,,,,l 
mass of solid) (time) 
Based on unit interfacial surface in two-fluid systems or based on unit surface 
of solid in gas-solid systems, 
I dNi 
moles i formed 
y ;  = -- = 
Based on unit volume of solid in gas-solid systems 
1 dN, 
y!'t = -- = 
moles i formed 
V, dt 
(volume of solid) (time) 
Based on unit volume of reactor, if different from the rate based on unit volume 
of fluid, 
1 dNi 
,.!"' = -- = 
moles i formed 
V, dt 
(volume of reactor) (time) 
In homogeneous systems the volume of fluid in the reactor is often identical to 
the volume of reactor. In such a case V and Vr are identical and Eqs. 2 and 6 
are used interchangeably. In heterogeneous systems all the above definitions of 
reaction rate are encountered, the definition used in any particular situation 
often being a matter of convenience. 
From Eqs. 2 to 6 these intensive definitions of reaction rate are related by 
volume 
mass of 
surface 
volume 
vol~me r y  
of solid 
of reactor 
(of fluid) ri = ( solid ) " = (of solid) r' = ( 
) " = ( 
) 


=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 5 
Speed of Chemical Reactions 
Some reactions occur very rapidly; others very, very slowly. For example, in the 
production of polyethylene, one of our most important plastics, or in the produc- 
tion of gasoline from crude petroleum, we want the reaction step to be complete 
in less than one second, while in waste water treatment, reaction may take days 
and days to do the job. 
Figure 1.3 indicates the relative rates at which reactions occur. To give you 
an appreciation of the relative rates or relative values between what goes on in 
sewage treatment plants and in rocket engines, this is equivalent to 
1 sec to 3 yr 
With such a large ratio, of course the design of reactors will be quite different 
in these cases. 
* 
t 
1 
wor'king 
. . . 
. . .  
Cellular rxs., 
hard 
Gases in porous 
industrial water 
Human 
catalyst particles * 
treatment plants 
at rest 
Coal furnaces 
Jet engines 
Rocket engines 
Bimolecular rxs. in which 
every collision counts, at 
about -1 atm and 400°C 
moles of A disappearing 
Figure 1.3 Rate of reactions -Ji = 
m3 of thing. s 
Overall Plan 
Reactors come in all colors, shapes, and sizes and are used for all sorts of 
reactions. As a brief sampling we have the giant cat crackers for oil refining; the 
monster blast furnaces for iron making; the crafty activated sludge ponds for 
sewage treatment; the amazing polymerization tanks for plastics, paints, and 
fibers; the critically important pharmaceutical vats for producing aspirin, penicil- 
lin, and birth control drugs; the happy-go-lucky fermentation jugs for moonshine; 
and, of course, the beastly cigarette. 
Such reactions are so different in rates and types that it would be awkward 
to try to treat them all in one way. So we treat them by type in this book because 
each type requires developing the appropriate set of performance equations. 


=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
6 
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 
/ EX4MPLB 1.1 
THE ROCKET ENGINE 
A rocket engine, Fig. El.l, burns a stoichiometric mixture of fuel (liquid hydro- 
gen) in oxidant (liquid oxygen). The combustion chamber is cylindrical, 75 cm 
long and 60 cm in diameter, and the combustion process produces 108 kgls of 
exhaust gases. If combustion is complete, find the rate of reaction of hydrogen 
and of oxygen. 
1 
Com~lete combustion 
~ 
Figure El.l 
We want to evaluate 
- - 1 d N ~ 2  
rH2 - - - 
1 dN0, 
V dt 
and 
-yo, = -- 
V dt 
Let us evaluate terms. The reactor volume and the volume in which reaction 
takes place are identical. Thus, 
Next, let us look at the reaction occurring. 
molecular weight: 
2gm 
16 gm 18 gm 
Therefore, 
H,O producedls = 108 kgls - 
= 6 kmolls 
( I l K t )  
So from Eq. (i) 
H, used = 6 kmolls 
0, used = 3 kmolls 


=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 7 
l 
and the rate of reaction is 
- - -  
1 
6 kmol 
.-- 
mol used 
3 
- 0.2121 m3 
s 
- 2.829 X lo4 (m3 of rocket) . s 
1 
kmol 
mol 
-To = - 
3 - 
= 1.415 X lo4 
2 0.2121 m3 
s 
- 
I 
Note: Compare these rates with the values given in Figure 1.3. 
/ EXAMPLE 1.2 
THE LIVING PERSON 
A human being (75 kg) consumes about 6000 kJ of food per day. Assume that 
I 
the food is all glucose and that the overall reaction is 
C,H,,O,+60,-6C02+6H,0, 
-AHr=2816kJ 
from air ' 
'breathe, 
out 
Find man's metabolic rate (the rate of living, loving, and laughing) in terms of 
moles of oxygen used per m3 of person per second. 
We want to find 
Let us evaluate the two terms in this equation. First of all, from our life experience 
we estimate the density of man to be 
Therefore, for the person in question 
Next, noting that each mole of glucose consumed uses 6 moles of oxygen and 
releases 2816 kJ of energy, we see that we need 
6000 kJIday ) ( 6 mol 0, 
mol 0, 
) = 12.8 day 
2816 kJ1mol glucose 
1 mol glucose 


=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
8 
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 
I 
Inserting into Eq. (i) 
1 
12.8 mol 0, used 
1 day 
mol 0, used 
= - 
24 X 3600 s = 0.002 
0.075 m3 
day 
m3 . s 
Note: Compare this value with those listed in Figure 1.3. 
PROBLEMS 
1.1. Municipal waste water treatment plant. Consider a municipal water treat- 
ment plant for a small community (Fig. P1.1). Waste water, 32 000 m3/day, 
flows through the treatment plant with a mean residence time of 8 hr, air 
is bubbled through the tanks, and microbes in the tank attack and break 
down the organic material 
microbes 
(organic waste) + 0, - 
C02 + H,O 
A typical entering feed has a BOD (biological oxygen demand) of 200 mg 
O,/liter, while the effluent has a negligible BOD. Find the rate of reaction, 
or decrease in BOD in the treatment tanks. 
Waste water, --I 
Waste water 
Clean water, 
32,000 m3/day 
treatment plant 
32,000 rn3/day 
t 
200 mg O2 
t 
Mean residence 
t 
Zero O2 needed 
neededlliter 
time t= 8 hr 
Figure P1.l 
1.2. Coal burning electrical power station. Large central power stations (about 
1000 MW electrical) using fluidized bed combustors may be built some day 
(see Fig. P1.2). These giants would be fed 240 tons of coallhr (90% C, 10% 
Fluidized bed 
\ 50% of the feed 
burns in these 1 0  units 
Figure P1.2 


=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
Chapter 1 Overview of Chemical Reaction Engineering 9 
H,), 50% of which would burn within the battery of primary fluidized beds, 
the other 50% elsewhere in the system. One suggested design would use a 
battery of 10 fluidized beds, each 20 m long, 4 m wide, and containing solids 
to a depth of 1 m. Find the rate of reaction within the beds, based on the 
oxygen used. 
1.3. Fluid cracking crackers (FCC). FCC reactors are among the largest pro- 
cessing units used in the petroleum industry. Figure P1.3 shows an example 
of such units. A typical unit is 4-10 m ID and 10-20 m high and contains 
about 50 tons of p = 800 kg/m3 porous catalyst. It is fed about 38 000 barrels 
of crude oil per day (6000 m3/day at a density p = 900 kg/m3), and it cracks 
these long chain hydrocarbons into shorter molecules. 
To get an idea of the rate of reaction in these giant units, let us simplify 
and suppose that the feed consists of just C,, hydrocarbon, or 
If 60% of the vaporized feed is cracked in the unit, what is the rate of 
reaction, expressed as - r r  (mols reactedlkg cat. s) and as r"' (mols reacted1 
m3 cat. s)? 
Figure P1.3 The Exxon Model IV FCC unit. 


=== PDF PAGE 26 ===


=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
Homogeneous Reactions 
in Ideal Reactors 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 
Chapter 10 
Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 113 
Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data I38 
Introduction to Reactor Design I83 
Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction I90 
Design for Single Reactions 1120 
Design for Parallel Reactions 1152 
Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 1170 
Temperature and Pressure Effects 1207 
Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 1240 


=== PDF PAGE 28 ===


=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
Chapter 2 
Kinetics of Homogeneous 
Reactions 
Simple Reactor Types 
Ideal reactors have three ideal flow or contacting patterns. We show these in 
Fig. 2.1, and we very often try to make real reactors approach these ideals as 
closely as possible. 
We particularly like these three flow or reacting patterns because they are 
easy to treat (it is simple to find their performance equations) and because one 
of them often is the best pattern possible (it will give the most of whatever it is 
we want). Later we will consider recycle reactors, staged reactors, and other flow 
pattern combinations, as well as deviations of real reactors from these ideals. 
The Rate Equation 
Suppose a single-phase reaction aA + bB + rR + sS. The most useful measure 
of reaction rate for reactant A is then 
F( 
rate of disappearance of A 
\ h 
1 dNA - (amount of A disappearing) 
= -\p " 
- 
(volume) (time) 
(1) 
( note that this is an 
-the 
minus sign 
intensive measure 
means disappearance 
In addition, the rates of reaction of all materials are related by 
Experience shows that the rate of reaction is influenced by the composition and 
the energy of the material. By energy we mean the temperature (random kinetic 
energy of the molecules), the light intensity within the system (this may affect 
13 


=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
14 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
Steady-state flow 
Batch 
Plug flow 
Mixed flow 
Uniform composition 
Fluid passes through the reactor 
Uniformly mixed, same 
everywhere in the reactor, 
with no mixing of earlier and later 
composition everywhere, 
but of course the 
entering fluid, and with no overtaking. 
within the reactor and 
composition changes 
It is as if the fluid moved in single 
at the exit. 
with time. 
file through the reactor. 
Figure 2.1 Ideal reactor types. 
the bond energy between atoms), the magnetic field intensity, etc. Ordinarily 
we only need to consider the temperature, so let us focus on this factor. Thus, 
we can write 
activation 
(2) 
terms 
terms 
reaction 
(temperature 
order 
dependent term 
Here are a few words about the concentration-dependent and the temperature- 
dependent terms of the rate. 
2.1 CONCENTRATION-DEPENDENT TERM OF A RATE EQUATION 
Before we can find the form of the concentration term in a rate expression, we 
must distinguish between different types of reactions. This distinction is based 
on the form and number of kinetic equations used to describe the progress of 
reaction. Also, since we are concerned with the concentration-dependent term 
of the rate equation, we hold the temperature of the system constant. 
Single and Multiple Reactions 
First of all, when materials react to form products it is usually easy to decide 
after examining the stoichiometry, preferably at more than one temperature, 
whether we should consider a single reaction or a number of reactions to be oc- 
curring. 
When a single stoichiometric equation and single rate equation are chosen to 
represent the progress of the reaction, we have a single reaction. When more 
than one stoichiometric equation is chosen to represent the observed changes, 


=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
2.1 Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 15 
then more than one kinetic expression is needed to follow the changing composi- 
tion of all the reaction components, and we have multiple reactions. 
Multiple reactions may be classified as: 
series reactions, 
parallel reactions, which are of two types 
competitive 
side by side 
and more complicated schemes, an example of which is 
Here, reaction proceeds in parallel with respect to B, but in series with respect 
to A, R, and S. 
Elementary and Nonelementary Reactions 
Consider a single reaction with stoichiometric equation 
If we postulate that the rate-controlling mechanism involves the collision or 
interaction of a single molecule of A with a single molecule of B, then the number 
of collisions of molecules A with B is proportional to the rate of reaction. But 
at a given temperature the number of collisions is proportional to the concentra- 
tion of reactants in the mixture; hence, the rate of disappearance of A is given by 
Such reactions in which the rate equation corresponds to a stoichiometric equa- 
tion are called elementary reactions. 
When there is no direct correspondence between stoichiometry and rate, then 
we have nonelementary reactions. The classical example of a nonelementary 
reaction is that between hydrogen and bromine, 
H, + Br, +2HBr 


=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
16 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
which has a rate expression* 
Nonelementary reactions are explained by assuming that what we observe as 
a single reaction is in reality the overall effect of a sequence of elementary 
reactions. The reason for observing only a single reaction rather than two or 
more elementary reactions is that the amount of intermediates formed is negligi- 
bly small and, therefore, escapes detection. We take up these explanations later. 
Molecularity and Order of Reaction 
The inolecularity of an elementary reaction is the number of molecules involved 
in the reaction, and this has been found to have the values of one, two, or 
occasionally three. Note that the molecularity refers only to an elementary re- 
action. 
Often we find that the rate of progress of a reaction, involving, say, materials 
A, B, . . . , D, can be approximated by an expression of the following type: 
where a, b, . . . , d are not necessarily related to the stoichiometric coefficients. 
We call the powers to which the concentrations are raised the order of the 
reaction. Thus, the reaction is 
ath order with respect to A 
bth order with respect to B 
nth order overall 
Since the order refers to the empirically found rate expression, it can have a 
fractional value and need not be an integer. However, the molecularity of a 
reaction must be an integer because it refers to the mechanism of the reaction, 
and can only apply to an elementary reaction. 
For rate expressions not of the form of Eq, 4, such as Eq. 3, it makes no sense 
to use the term reaction order. 
Rate Constant k 
When the rate expression for a homogeneous chemical reaction is written in the 
form of Eq. 4, the dimensions of the rate constant k for the nth-order reaction are 
* To eliminate much writing, in this chapter we use square brackets to indicate concentrations. Thus, 
C
,
,
 
= [HBr] 


=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
2.1 
Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 17 
which for a first-order reaction becomes simply 
Representation of an Elementary Reaction 
In expressing a rate we may use any measure equivalent to concentration (for 
example, partial pressure), in which case 
Whatever measure we use leaves the order unchanged; however, it will affect 
the rate constant k. 
For brevity, elementary reactions are often represented by an equation showing 
both the molecularity and the rate constant. For example, 
represents a biomolecular irreversible reaction with second-order rate constant 
k,, implying that the rate of reaction is 
It would not be proper to write Eq. 7 as 
for this would imply that the rate expression is 
Thus, we must be careful to distinguish between the one particular equation that 
represents the elementary reaction and the many possible representations of the 
stoichiometry. 
We should note that writing the elementary reaction with the rate constant, 
as shown by Eq. 7, may not be sufficient to avoid ambiguity. At times it may be 
necessary to specify the component in the reaction to which the rate constant is 
referred. For example, consider the reaction, 
If the rate is measured in terms of B, the rate equation is 


=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
18 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
If it refers to D, the rate equation is 
Or if it refers to the product T, then 
But from the stoichiometry 
hence, 
In Eq. 8, which of these three k values are we referring to? We cannot tell. 
Hence, to avoid ambiguity when the stoichiometry involves different numbers 
of molecules of the various components, we must specify the component be- 
ing considered. 
To sum up, the condensed form of expressing the rate can be ambiguous. To 
eliminate any possible confusion, write the stoichiometric equation followed by 
the complete rate expression, and give the units of the rate constant. 
Representation of a Nonelementary Reaction 
A nonelementary reaction is one whose stoichiometry does not match its kinetics. 
For example, 
Stoichiometry: 
N2 + 3H2 2NH3 
Rate: 
This nonmatch shows that we must try to develop a multistep reaction model 
to explain the kinetics. 
Kinetic Models for Nonelementary Reactions 
To explain the kinetics of nonelementary reactions we assume that a sequence 
of elementary reactions is actually occurring but that we cannot measure or 
observe the intermediates formed because they are only present in very minute 
quantities. Thus, we observe only the initial reactants and final products, or what 
appears to be a single reaction. For example, if the kinetics of the reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
2.1 
Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 19 
indicates that the reaction is nonelementary, we may postulate a series of elemen- 
tary steps to explain the kinetics, such as 
where the asterisks refer to the unobserved intermediates. To test our postulation 
scheme, we must see whether its predicted kinetic expression corresponds to ex- 
periment. 
The types of intermediates we may postulate are suggested by the chemistry 
of the materials. These may be grouped as follows. 
Free Radicals. Free atoms or larger fragments of stable molecules that contain 
one or more unpaired electrons are called free radicals. The unpaired electron 
is designated by a dot in the chemical symbol for the substance. Some free 
radicals are relatively stable, such as triphenylmethyl, 
but as a rule they are unstable and highly reactive, such as 
Ions and Polar Substances. Electrically charged atoms, molecules, or fragments 
of molecules. such as 
N;, 
Nat, OH-, H30t, NH;, 
CH,OH;, 
I- 
are called ions. These may act as active intermediates in reactions. 
Molecules. Consider the consecutive reactions 
Ordinarily these are treated as multiple reactions. However, if the intermediate 
R is highly reactive its mean lifetime will be very small and its concentration in 
the reacting mixture can become too small to measure. In such a situation R 
may not be observed and can be considered to be a reactive intermediate. 


=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
20 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
Transition Complexes. The numerous collisions between reactant molecules 
result in a wide distribution of energies among the individual molecules. This 
can result in strained bonds, unstable forms of molecules, or unstable association 
of molecules which can then either decompose to give products, or by further 
collisions return to molecules in the normal state. Such unstable forms are called 
transition complexes. 
Postulated reaction schemes involving these four kinds of intermediates can 
be of two types. 
Nonchain Reactions. In the nonchain reaction the intermediate is formed in 
the first reaction and then disappears as it reacts further to give the product. Thus, 
Reactants -, (Intermediates)" 
(Intermediates)" +Products 
Chain Reactions. In chain reactions the intermediate is formed in a first reaction, 
called the chain initiation step. It then combines with reactant to form product and 
more intermediate in the chain propagation step. Occasionally the intermediate is 
destroyed in the chain termination step. Thus, 
Reactant + (Intermediate)" 
Initiation 
(Intermediate)" + Reactant + (Intermediate)" + Product Propagation 
(Intermediate)" -,Product 
Termination 
The essential feature of the chain reaction is the propagation step. In this step 
the intermediate is not consumed but acts simply as a catalyst for the conversion 
of material. Thus, each molecule of intermediate can catalyze a long chain of 
reactions, even thousands, before being finally destroyed. 
The following are examples of mechanisms of various kinds. 
1. Free radicals, chain reaction mechanism. The reaction 
Hz + Br, + 2HBr 
with experimental rate 
can be explained by the following scheme which introduces and involves 
the intermediates Ha and Bra, 
Br, * 
2Br. 
Initiation and termination 
Bra + H,*HBr 
+ Ha 
Propagation 
He + Br, + HBr + Bra 
Propagation 


=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
2.1 Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 21 
2. Molecular intermediates, nonchain mechanism. The general class of en- 
zyme-catalyzed fermentation reactions 
with 
A-R enzyme 
with experimental rate 
C 
constant 
is viewed to proceed with intermediate (A. enzyme)* as follows: 
A + enzyme + (A. enzyme)* 
(A. enzyme)* -.R 
+ enzyme 
In such reactions the concentration of intermediate may become more than 
negligible, in which case a special analysis, first proposed by Michaelis and 
Menten (1913), is required. 
3. Transition complex, nonchain mechanism. The spontaneous decomposition 
of azomethane 
exhibits under various conditions first-order, second-order, or intermediate 
kinetics. This type of behavior can be explained by postulating the existence 
of an energized and unstable form for the reactant, A*. Thus, 
A + A +A* + A 
Formation of energized molecule 
A* + A + A  + A 
Return to stable form by collision 
A * + R + S  
Spontaneous decomposition into products 
Lindemann (1922) first suggested this type of intermediate. 
Testing Kinetic Models 
Two problems make the search for the correct mechanism of reaction difficult. 
First, the reaction may proceed by more than one mechanism, say free radical 
and ionic, with relative rates that change with conditions. Second, more than 
one mechanism can be consistent with kinetic data. Resolving these problems 
is difficult and requires an extensive knowledge of the chemistry of the substances 
involved. Leaving these aside, let us see how to test the correspondence between 
experiment and a proposed mechanism that involves a sequence of elemen- 
tary reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
22 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
In these elementary reactions we hypothesize the existence of either of two 
types of intermediates. 
Type 1. An unseen and unmeasured intermediate X usually present at such 
small concentration that its rate of change in the mixture can be taken to be 
zero. Thus, we assume 
d[XI_ 0 
[XI is small and - 
- 
dt 
This is called the steady-state approximation. Mechanism types 1 and 2, above, 
adopt this type of intermediate, and Example 2.1 shows how to use it. 
Type 2. Where a homogeneous catalyst of initial concentration Co is present in 
two forms, either as free catalyst C or combined in an appreciable extent to 
form intermediate X, an accounting for the catalyst gives 
[Col = [CI + [XI 
We then also assume that either 
dX - 0 
-- 
dt 
or that the intermediate is in equilibrium with its reactants; thus, 
( r e a ~ t )  
+ (cat2st) + (intermediate 
X 
where 
Example 2.2 and Problem 2.23 deal with this type of intermediate. 
The trial-and-error procedure involved in searching for a mechanism is illus- 
trated in the following two examples. 
, SEARCH FOR THE REACTION MECHANISM 
The irreversible reaction 
has been studied kinetically, and the rate of formation of product has been found 
to be well correlated by the following rate equation: 
I 
rAB = kC2,. . . independent of CA. 
(11) 


=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
2.1 
Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 23 
What reaction mechanism is suggested by this rate expression if the chemistry 
of the reaction suggests that the intermediate consists of an association of reactant 
molecules and that a chain reaction does not occur? 
If this were an elementary reaction, the rate would be given by 
Since Eqs. 11 and 12 are not of the same type, the reaction evidently is nonelemen- 
tary. Consequently, let us try various mechanisms and see which gives a rate 
expression similar in form to the experimentally found expression. We start with 
simple two-step models, and if these are unsuccessful we will try more complicated 
three-, four-, or five-step models. 
Model 1. Hypothesize a two-step reversible scheme involving the formation of 
an intermediate substance A;, not actually seen and hence thought to be present 
only in small amounts. Thus, 
which really involves four elementary reactions 
Let the k values refer to the components disappearing; thus, k, refers to A, k, 
refers to A,*, etc. 
Now write the expression for the rate of formation of AB. Since this component 
is involved in Eqs. 16 and 17, its overall rate of change is the sum of the individual 
rates. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
24 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
Because the concentration of intermediate AT is so small and not measurable, 
the above rate expression cannot be tested in its present form. So, replace [A:] 
by concentrations that can be measured, such as [A], [B], or [AB]. This is done 
in the following manner. From the four elementary reactions that all involve A: 
we find 
1 
YA* = - kl[AI2 - k2[A;] - k3[Af] [B] + k4[A] [AB] 
2 
(19) 
Because the concentration of AT is always extremely small we may assume that 
its rate of change is zero or 
This is the steady-state approximation. Combining Eqs. 19 and 20 we then find 
which, when replaced in Eq. 18, simplifying and cancelling two terms (two terms 
will always cancel if you are doing it right), gives the rate of formation of AB 
in terms of measurable quantities. Thus, 
In searching for a model consistent with observed kinetics we may, if we wish, 
restrict a more general model by arbitrarily selecting the magnitude of the various 
rate constants. Since Eq. 22 does not match Eq. 11, let us see if any of its 
simplified forms will. Thus, if k, is very small, this expression reduces to 
If k, is very small, r, reduces to 
Neither of these special forms, Eqs. 23 and 24, matches the experimentally found 
rate, Eq. 11. Thus, the hypothesized mechanism, Eq. 13, is incorrect, so another 
needs to be tried. 


=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
2.1 Concentration-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 25 
Model 2. First note that the stoichiometry of Eq. 10 is symmetrical in A and 
B, so just interchange A and B in Model 1, put k, = 0 and we will get r,, 
= 
k[BI2, which is what we want. So the mechanism that will match the second- 
order rate equation is 
1 
B + B + B ?  
1 
We are fortunate in this example to have represented our data by a form of 
equation which happened to match exactly that obtained from the theoretical 
mechanism. Often a number of different equation types will fit a set of experimen- 
tal data equally well, especially for somewhat scattered data. Hence, to avoid 
rejecting the correct mechanism, it is advisable to test the fit of the various 
theoretically derived equations to the raw data using statistical criteria whenever 
possible, rather than just matching equation forms: 
SEARCH FOR A MECHANISM FOR THE ENZYME- 
SUBSTRATE REACTION 
Here, a reactant, called the substrate, is converted to product by the action of 
an enzyme, a high molecular weight (mw > 10 000) protein-like substance. An 
enzyme is highly specific, catalyzing one particular reaction, or one group of 
reactions. Thus, 
enzyme 
A-R 
I 
Many of these reactions exhibit the following behavior: 
1. A rate proportional to the concentration of enzyme introduced into the 
mixture [E,]. 
2. At low reactant concentration the rate is proportional to the reactant con- 
centration, [A]. 
3. At high reactant concentration the rate levels off and becomes independent 
of reactant concentration. 
I 
Propose a mechanism to account for this behavior. 
1 SOLUTION 
Michaelis and Menten (1913) were the first to solve this puzzle. (By the way, 
Michaelis received the Nobel prize in chemistry.) They guessed that the reaction 
proceeded as follows 


=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
26 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
with the two assumptions 
and 
First write the rates for the pertinent reaction components of Eq. 26. This gives 
and 
Eliminating [El from Eqs. 27 and 30 gives 
and when Eq. 31 is introduced into Eq. 29 we find 
([MI = (lei) 
is called 
the Michaelis constant 
By comparing with experiment, we see that this equation fits the three re- 
ported facts: 
[A] when [A] 4 [MI 
dt 
is independent of [A] when [A] S [MI 
For more discussion about this reaction, see Problem 2.23. 
m 


=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
2.2 
Temperature-Dependent Term of a Rate Equation 27 
2.2 
TEMPERATURE-DEPENDENT TERM OF A RATE EQUATION 
Temperature Dependency from Arrhenius' Law 
For many reactions, and particularly elementary reactions, the rate expression 
can be written as a product of a temperature-dependent term and a composition- 
dependent term, or 
For such reactions the temperature-dependent term, the reaction rate constant, 
has been found in practically all cases to be well represented by Arrhenius' law: 
where k, is called the frequency or pre-exponential factor and E is called the 
activation energy of the reaction." This expression fits experiment well over wide 
temperature ranges and is strongly suggested from various standpoints as being 
a very good approximation to the true temperature dependency. 
At the same concentration, but at two different temperatures, Arrhenius' law 
indicates that 
provided that E stays constant. 
Comparison of Theories with Arrhenius' Law 
The expression 
summarizes the predictions of the simpler versions of the collision and transition 
state theories for the temperature dependency of the rate constant. For more 
complicated versions m can be as great as 3 or 4. Now, because the exponential 
term is so much more temperature-sensitive than the pre-exponential term, the 
variation of the latter with temperature is effectively masked, and we have 
in effect 
* There seems to be a disagreement in the dimensions used to report the activation energy; some 
authors use joules and others use joules per mole. However, joules per mole are clearly indicated 
in Eq. 34. 
But what moles are we referring to in the units of E? This is unclear. However, since E and R 
always appear together, and since they both refer to the same number of moles, this bypasses the 
problem. This whole question can be avoided by using the ratio E/R throughout. 


=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
28 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
Figure 2.2 Sketch showing temperature dependency of the reaction rate. 
5 
This shows that Arrhenius' law is a good approximation to the temperature 
dependency of both collision and transition-state theories. 
- 
! A T =  ioooo/ 
/ 
AT= 870 I 
7 
do:i;ing 
I+ 
for ,+- 
-1 doubling I 
I 
of rate 
, 
of rate 
t 
Activation Energy and Temperature Dependency 
at 2 0 0 0 K  
at lOOOK 
at 463K 
at 376K 
1/T 
The temperature dependency of reactions is determined by the activation energy 
and temperature level of the reaction, as illustrated in Fig. 2.2 and Table 2.1. 
These findings are summarized as follows: 
1. From Arrhenius' law a plot of In k vs 1IT gives a straight line, with large 
slope for large E and small slope for small E. 
2. Reactions with high activation energies are very temperature-sensitive; reac- 
tions with low activation energies are relatively temperature-insensitive. 
Table 2.1 Temperature Rise Needed to Double the Rate of Reaction for 
Activation Energies and Average Temperatures Showna 
Average 
Activation Energy E 
Temperature 
40 kJ/mol 
160 kJ/mol 
280 kJ/mol 
400 kJ/mol 
0°C 
11°C 
2.7"C 
1.5"C 
l.l°C 
400°C 
65 
16 
9.3 
6.5 
1000°C 
233 
58 
33 
23 
2000°C 
744 
185 
106 
74 
"Shows 
temperature sensitivity of reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
2.3 Searching for a Mechanism 29 
3. Any given reaction is much more temperature-sensitive at a low temperature 
than at a high temperature. 
4. From the Arrhenius law, the value of the frequency factor k, does not affect 
the temperature sensitivity. 
SEARCH FOR THE ACTIVATION ENERGY OF A 
PASTEURIZATION PROCESS 
Milk is pasteurized if it is heated to 63OC for 30 min, but if it is heated to 
74°C it only needs 15 s for the same result. Find the activation energy of this 
sterilization process. 
To ask for the activation energy of a process means assuming an Arrhenius 
temperature dependency for the process. Here we are told that 
t1 = 30 min at a TI = 336 K 
t2 = 15 sec 
at a T2 = 347 K 
Now the rate is inversely proportional to the reaction time, or rate 
lltime so 
Eq. 35 becomes 
from which the activation energy 
2.3 SEARCHING FOR A MECHANISM 
The more we know about what is occurring during reaction, what the reacting 
materials are, and how they react, the more assurance we have for proper design. 
This is the incentive to find out as much as we can about the factors influencing 
a reaction within the limitations of time and effort set by the economic optimiza- 
tion of the process. 
There are three areas of investigation of a reaction, the stoichiometry, the 
kinetics, and the mechanism. In general, the stoichiometry is studied first, and 
when this is far enough along, the kinetics is then investigated. With empirical 
rate expressions available, the mechanism is then looked into. In any investigative 


=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
30 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
program considerable feedback of information occurs from area to area. For 
example, our ideas about the stoichiometry of the reaction may change on the 
basis of kinetic data obtained, and the form of the kinetic equations themselves 
may be suggested by mechanism studies. With this kind of relationship of the 
many factors, no straightforward experimental program can be formulated for 
the study of reactions. Thus, it becomes a matter of shrewd scientific detective 
work, with carefully planned experimental programs especially designed to dis- 
criminate between rival hypotheses, which in turn have been suggested and 
formulated on the basis of all available pertinent information. 
Although we cannot delve into the many aspects of this problem, a number 
of clues that are often used in such experimentation can be mentioned. 
1. Stoichiometry can tell whether we have a single reaction or not. Thus, a 
complicated stoichiometry 
or one that changes with reaction conditions or extent of reaction is clear 
evidence of multiple reactions. 
2. Stoichiometry can suggest whether a single reaction is elementary or not 
because no elementary reactions with molecularity greater than three have 
been observed to date. As an example, the reaction 
is not elementary. 
3. A comparison of the stoichiometric equation with the experimental kinetic 
expression can suggest whether or not we are dealing with an elementary re- 
action. 
4. A large difference in the order of magnitude between the experimentally 
found frequency factor of a reaction and that calculated from collision 
theory or transition-state theory may suggest a nonelementary reaction; 
however, this is not necessarily true. For example, certain isomerizations 
have very low frequency factors and are still elementary. 
5. Consider two alternative paths for a simple reversible reaction. If one of 
these paths is preferred for the forward reaction, the same path must also be 
preferred for the reverse reaction. This is called the principle of microscopic 
reversibility. Consider, for example, the forward reaction of 
At a first sight this could very well be an elementary biomolecular reaction 
with two molecules of ammonia combining to yield directly the four product 
molecules. From this principle, however, the reverse reaction would then 
also have to be an elementary reaction involving the direct combination of 
three molecules of hydrogen with one of nitrogen. Because such a process 
is rejected as improbable, the bimolecular forward mechanism must also 
be rejected. 
6. The principle of microreversibility also indicates that changes involving 
bond rupture, molecular syntheses, or splitting are likely to occur one at a 


=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
2.3 
Searching for a Mechanism 31 
time, each then being an elementary step in the mechanism. From this point 
of view, the simultaneous splitting of the complex into the four product 
molecules in the reaction 
is very unlikely. This rule does not apply to changes that involve a shift in 
electron density along a molecule, which may take place in a cascade-like 
manner. For example, the transformation 
CH2=CH-CH2-0-CH=CH2 
+CH,=CH-CH2-CH2-CHO 
......................... 
....................... 
vinyl ally1 ether 
n-pentaldehyde-ene 4 
can be expressed in terms of the following shifts in electron density: 
/ H 
/ H 
CH,fC 
CH 
-
-
 
I lf\0 
F-c 
\\ 
v-L- 
\,/ - 
"2 
0 
'? 
CH-CH, 
CH= CH, 
/ H 
/ H 
CH, = C 
'.-A 
F-c 
CH': ,*-? - 
C p  
\\ 
\-2,' 
0 
C H ~ C H ,  
CH= CH, 
7. For multiple reactions a change in the observed activation energy with 
temperature indicates a shift in the controlling mechanism of reaction. Thus, 
for an increase in temperature E,,, rises for reactions or steps in parallel, 
E,,, falls for reactions or steps in series. Conversely, for a decrease in 
temperature E,,, falls for reactions in parallel, E,,, rises for reactions in 
series. These findings are illustrated in Fig. 2.3. 
Mech. 1 
High E 
LQR 
I High T 
Low T 
Mech. 1 
Mech. 2 
A
d
X
d
R
 
High T 
Low T * 
1/T 
Figure 2.3 A change in activation energy indicates a shift in 
controlling mechanism of reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
32 Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
2.4 
PREDICTABILITY OF REACTION RATE FROM THEORY 
Concentration-Dependent Term 
If a reaction has available a number of competing paths (e.g., noncatalytic and 
catalytic), it will in fact proceed by all of these paths, although primarily by the 
one of least resistance. This path usually dominates. Only a knowledge of the 
energies of all possible intermediates will allow prediction of the dominant path 
and its corresponding rate expression. As such information cannot be found in 
the present state of knowledge, a priori prediction of the form of the concentra- 
tion term is not possible. Actually, the form of the experimentally found rate 
expression is often the clue used to investigate the energies of the intermediates 
of a reaction. 
Temperature-Dependent Term 
Assuming that we already know the mechanism of reaction and whether or not 
it is elementary, we may then proceed to the prediction of the frequency factor 
and activation energy terms of the rate constant. 
If we are lucky, frequency factor predictions from either collision or transition- 
state theory may come within a factor of 100 of the correct value; however, in 
specific cases predictions may be much further off. 
Though activation energies can be estimated from transition-state theory, 
reliability is poor, and it is probably best to estimate them from the experimental 
findings for reactions of similar compounds. For example, the activation energies 
of the following homologous series of reactions 
ethanol 
RI + C6H50Na - 
C6H50R + NaI 
where R is 
CH, 
GH,, 
iso-C3H7 sec-C4H, 
C,H5 C,H17 iso-C,H, 
sec-C,H,, 
C,H, 
C16H3, iso-C,H,, 
sec-C,H17 
C,H9 
all lie between 90 and 98 kJ. 
Use of Predicted Values in Design 
The frequent order-of-magnitude predictions of the theories tend to confirm the 
correctness of their representations, help find the form and the energies of various 
intermediates, and give us a better understanding of chemical structure. However, 
theoretical predictions rarely match experiment by a factor of two. In addition, 
we can never tell beforehand whether the predicted rate will be in the order of 
magnitude of experiment or will be off by a factor of lo6. Therefore, for engi- 


=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
Problems 33 
neering design, this kind of information should not be relied on and experimen- 
tally found rates should be used in all cases. Thus, theoretical studies may be 
used as a supplementary aid to suggest the temperature sensitivity of a given 
reaction from a similar type of reaction, to suggest the upper limits of reaction 
rate, etc. Design invariably relies on experimentally determined rates. 
RELATED READING 
Jungers, J. C., et al., Cinttique chimique appliqute, Technip, Paris, 1958. 
Laidler, K. J., Chemical Kinetics, 2nd ed., Harper and Row, New York, 1987. 
Moore, W. J., Basic Physical Chemistry, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1983. 
REFERENCES 
Lindemann, F. A., Trans. Faraday Soc., 17,598 (1922). 
Michaelis, L., and Menten, M. L., Biochem. Z., 49,333 (1913). This treatment is discussed 
by Laidler (1987), see Related Readings. 
PROBLEMS 
2.1. A reaction has the stoichiometric equation A + B = 2R. What is the order 
of reaction? 
1 
2.2. Given the reaction 2N0, + - 0, = N205, what is the relation between 
2 
the rates of formation and disappearance of the three reaction components? 
1 
1 
2.3. A reaction with stoichiometric equation - A + B = R + - S has the 
following rate expression 
2 
2 
What is the rate expression for this reaction if the stoichiometric equation 
is written as A + 2B = 2R + S? 
2.4. For the enzyme-substrate reaction of Example 2, the rate of disappearance 
of substrate is given by 
What are the units of the two constants? 


=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
34 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
2.5. For the complex reaction with stoichiometry A + 3B + 2R + S and with 
second-order rate expression 
are the reaction rates related as follows: r, = r, = r,? If the rates are not 
so related, then how are they related? Please account for the signs, + or -. 
2.6. A certain reaction has a rate given by 
-r, 
= 0.005C2, 
mol/cm3 . min 
If the concentration is to be expressed in mollliter and time in hours, what 
would be the value and units of the rate constant? 
2.7. For a gas reaction at 400 K the rate is reported as 
(a) What are the units of the rate constant? 
(b) What is the value of the rate constant for this reaction if the rate 
equation is expressed as 
2.8. The decomposition of nitrous oxide is found to proceed as follows: 
What is the order of this reaction with respect to N,O, and overall? 
2.9. The pyrolysis of ethane proceeds with an activation energy of about 300 
kJImol. How much faster is the decomposition at 650°C than at 500"C? 
2.10. A 1100-K n-nonane thermally cracks (breaks down into smaller molecules) 
20 times as rapidly as at 1000 K. Find the activation energy for this decompo- 
sition. 
2.11. In the mid-nineteenth century the entomologist Henri Fabre noted that 
French ants (garden variety) busily bustled about their business on hot 


=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
Problems 35 
days but were rather sluggish on cool days. Checking his results with Oregon 
ants, I find 
Runningspeed,m/hr 
150 160 230 
295 
370 
Temperature, "C 1
3
 16 
22 
24 
28 
What activation energy represents this change in bustliness? 
2.12. The maximum allowable temperature for a reactor is 800 K. At present 
our operating set point is 780 K, the 20-K margin of safety to account for 
fluctuating feed, sluggish controls, etc. Now, with a more sophisticated 
control system we would be able to raise our set point to 792 K with the 
same margin of safety that we now have. By how much can the reaction 
rate, hence, production rate, be raised by this change if the reaction taking 
place in the reactor has an activation energy of 175 kJ/mol? 
2.13. Every May 22 I plant one watermelon seed. I water it, I fight slugs, I pray, 
I watch my beauty grow, and finally the day comes when the melon ripens. 
I then harvest and feast. Of course, some years are sad, like 1980, when a 
bluejay flew off with the seed. Anyway, six summers were a pure joy and 
for these I've tabulated the number of growing days versus the mean 
daytime temperature during the growing season. Does the temperature 
affect the growth rate? If so, represent this by an activation energy. 
liar 
I 
1976 1977 1982 1984 1985 1988 
Growing days 
87 
85 
74 
78 
90 
84 
Mean temp, "C 
22.0 
23.4 
26.3 
24.3 
21.1 
22.7 
2.14. On typical summer days, field crickets nibble, jump, and chirp now and 
then. But at a night when great numbers congregate, chirping seems to 
become a serious business and tends to be in unison. In 1897, A. E. Dolbear 
(Am. Naturalist, 31,970) reported that this social chirping rate was depen- 
dent on the temperature as given by 
(number of chirps in 15 s) + 40 = (temperature, OF) 
Assuming that the chirping rate is a direct measure of the metabolic rate, 
find the activation energy in kJ/mol of these crickets in the temperature 
range 60430°F. 
2.15. On doubling the concentration of reactant, the rate of reaction triples. Find 
the reaction order. 
For the stoichiometry A + B -+ (products) find the reaction orders with 
respect to A and B. 


=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
36 
Chapter 2 Kinetics of Homogeneous Reactions 
2.18. Show that the following scheme 
NO* + NO: A
2
~
0
~
 
proposed by R. Ogg, J. Chem. Phys., 15,337 (1947) is consistent with, and 
can explain, the observed first-order decomposition of N205. 
2.19. The decomposition of reactant A at 400°C for pressures between 1 and 
10 atm follows a first-order rate law. 
(a) Show that a mechanism similar to azomethane decomposition, p. 21, 
is consistent with the observed kinetics. 
Different mechanisms can be proposed to explain first-order kinetics. To 
claim that this mechanism is correct in the face of the other alternatives 
requires additional evidence. 
(b) For this purpose, what further experiments would you suggest we run 
and what results would you expect to find? 
2.20. Experiment shows that the homogeneous decomposition of ozone proceeds 
with a rate 
(a) What is the overall order of reaction? 
(b) Suggest a two-step mechanism to explain this rate and state how you 
would further test this mechanism. 
2.21. Under the influence of oxidizing agents, hypophosphorous acid is trans- 
formed into phosphorous acid: 
oxidizing agent 
H,P02 - 
H3PO3 


=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
Problems 37 
The kinetics of this transformation present the following features. At a 
low concentration of oxidizing agent, 
rH3P03 
= k [oxidizing agent] [H,PO,] 
At a high concentration of oxidizing agent, 
To explain the observed kinetics, it has been postulated that, with hydrogen 
ions as catalyst, normal unreactive H3P02 is transformed reversibly into 
an active form, the nature of which is unknown. This intermediate then 
reacts with the oxidizing agent to give H3P03. Show that this scheme does 
explain the observed kinetics. 
2.22. Come up with (guess and then verify) a mechanism that is consistent with 
the experimentally found rate equation for the following reaction 
2A + B -+ A2B with + rAzB = k[A] [B] 
2.23. Mechanism for enzyme catalyzed reactions. To explain the kinetics of en- 
zyme-substrate reactions, Michaelis and Menten (1913) came up with the 
following mechanism, which uses an equilibrium assumption 
kl 
A+E-X 
k2 
with K = - 
and with 
[Eo] = [El + [XI 
k 
[A1 [El ' 
XLR 
+ E 
and where [E,] represents the total enzyme and [El represents the free 
unattached enzyme. 
G. E. Briggs and J. B. S. Haldane, Biochem J., 19, 338 (1925), on the 
other hand, employed a steady-state assumption in place of the equilibrium 
assumption 
kl 
A+E-X 
k2 
with d[Xl = 0, and [Eo] = [El + [XI 
dt 
xk3-R+E 
What final rate form -rA in terms of [A], [E,], k,, k,, and k, does 
(a) the Michaelis-Menten mechanism give? 
(b) the Briggs-Haldane mechanism give? 


=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
Chapter 3 
Interpretation of Batch 
Reactor Data 
A rate equation characterizes the rate of reaction, and its form may either be 
suggested by theoretical considerations or simply be the result of an empirical 
curve-fitting procedure. In any case, the value of the constants of the equation 
can only be found by experiment; predictive methods are inadequate at present. 
The determination of the rate equation is usually a two-step procedure; first 
the concentration dependency is found at fixed temperature and then the temper- 
ature dependence of the rate constants is found, yielding the complete rate 
equation. 
Equipment by which empirical information is obtained can be divided into 
two types, the batch and flow reactors. The batch reactor is simply a container 
to hold the contents while they react. All that has to be determined is the extent 
of reaction at various times, and this can be followed in a number of ways, 
for example: 
1. By following the concentration of a given component. 
2. By following the change in some physical property of the fluid, such as the 
electrical conductivity or refractive index. 
3. By following the change in total pressure of a constant-volume system. 
4. By following the change in volume of a constant-pressure system. 
The experimental batch reactor is usually operated isothermally and at constant 
volume because it is easy to interpret the results of such runs. This reactor is a 
relatively simple device adaptable to small-scale laboratory set-ups, and it needs 
but little auxiliary equipment or instrumentation. Thus, it is used whenever 
possible for obtaining homogeneous kinetic data. This chapter deals with the 
batch reactor. 
The flow reactor is used primarily in the study of the kinetics of heterogeneous 
reactions. Planning of experiments and interpretation of data obtained in flow 
reactors are considered in later chapters. 
There are two procedures for analyzing kinetic data, the integral and the 
differential methods. In the integral method of analysis we guess a particular 
form of rate equation and, after appropriate integration and mathematical manip- 
ulation, predict that the plot of a certain concentration function versus time 


=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 39 
should yield a straight line. The data are plotted, and if a reasonably good straight 
line is obtained, then the rate equation is said to satisfactorily fit the data. 
In the differential method of analysis we test the fit of the rate expression to 
the data directly and without any integration. However, since the rate expression 
is a differential equation, we must first find (l/V)(dNldt) from the data before 
attempting the fitting procedure. 
There are advantages and disadvantages to each method. The integral method 
is easy to use and is recommended when testing specific mechanisms, or relatively 
simple rate expressions, or when the data are so scattered that we cannot reliably 
find the derivatives needed in the differential method. The differential method 
is useful in more complicated situations but requires more accurate or larger 
amounts of data. The integral method can only test this or that particular mecha- 
nism or rate form; the differential method can be used to develop or build up 
a rate equation to fit the data. 
In general, it is suggested that integral analysis be attempted first, and, if not 
successful, that the differential method be tried. 
3.1 CONSTANT-VOLUME BATCH REACTOR 
When we mention the constant-volume batch reactor we are really referring to 
the volume of reaction mixture, and not the volume of reactor. Thus, this term 
actually means a constant-density reaction system. Most liquid-phase reactions 
as well as all gas-phase reactions occurring in a constant-volume bomb fall in 
this class. 
In a constant-volume system the measure of reaction rate of component i be- 
comes 
or for ideal gases, where C = p/RT, 
Thus, the rate of reaction of any component is given by the rate of change of 
its concentration or partial pressure; so no matter how we choose to follow 
the progress of the reaction, we must eventually relate this measure to the 
concentration or partial pressure if we are to follow the rate of reaction. 
For gas reactions with changing numbers of moles, a simple way of finding 
the reaction rate is to follow the change in total pressure .n of the system. Let 
us see how this is done. 
Analysis of Total Pressure Data Obtained in a Constant-Volume System. For 
isothermal gas reactions where the number of moles of material changes during 
reaction, let us develop the general expression which relates the changing total 
pressure of the system TI to the changing concentration or partial pressure of 
any of the reaction components. 


=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
40 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Write the general stoichiometric equation, and under each term indicate the 
number of moles of that component: 
a A 
+ 
bB 
+ . . .  = 
rR 
+ 
sS 
+ . . .  
At time 0: 
N,, 
NBO 
N ~ o  
Nso 
Nineit 
At time t: N, = NAo - ax 
NB = NBo - bx 
NR = NRO + rx 
NS = NsO + sx 
Nine, 
Initially the total number of moles present in the system is 
but at time t it is 
where 
Assuming that the ideal gas law holds, we may write for any reactant, say Ain 
the system of volume V 
Combining Eqs. 3 and 4 we obtain 
Equation 5 gives the concentration or partial pressure of reactant A as a function 
of the total pressure n at time t, initial partial pressure of A, pAo, and initial total 
pressure of the system, .rr,. 
Similarly, for any product R we can find 
Equations 5 and 6 are the desired relationships between total pressure of the 
system and the partial pressure of reacting materials. 
It should be emphasized that if the precise stoichiometry is not known, or if 
more than one stoichiometric equation is needed to represent the reaction, then 
the "total pressure" procedure cannot be used. 


=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 41 
The Conversion. Let us introduce one other useful term, the fractional conver- 
sion, or the fraction of any reactant, say A, converted to something else, or the 
fraction of A reacted away. We call this, simply, the conversion of A, with 
symbol XA . 
Suppose that NAo is the initial amount of A in the reactor at time t = 0, and 
that NA is the amount present at time t. Then the conversion of A in the constant 
volume system is given by 
and 
We will develop the equations in this chapter in terms of concentration of reaction 
components and also in terms of conversions. 
Later we will relate XA and CA for the more general case where the volume 
of the system does not stay constant. 
Integral Method of Analysis of Data 
General Procedure. The integral method of analysis always puts a particular 
rate equation to the test by integrating and comparing the predicted C versus t 
curve with the experimental C versus t data. If the fit is unsatisfactory, another 
rate equation is guessed and tested. This procedure is shown and used in the 
cases next treated. It should be noted that the integral method is especially useful 
for fitting simple reaction types corresponding to elementary reactions. Let us 
take up these kinetic forms. 
Irreversible Unimolecular-Type First-Order Reactions. Consider the reaction 
Suppose we wish to test the first-order rate equation of the following type, 
for this reaction. Separating and integrating we obtain 


=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
42 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
In terms of conversion (see Eqs. 7 and 8), the rate equation, Eq. 10, becomes 
which on rearranging and integrating gives 
A plot of In (1 - XA) or In (CA/CAo) vs. t, as shown in Fig. 3.1, gives a straight 
line through the origin for this form of rate of equation. If the experimental data 
seems to be better fitted by a curve than by a straight line, try another rate form 
because the first-order reaction does not satisfactorily fit the data. 
Caution. We should point out that equations such as 
are first order but are not am'enable to this kind of analysis; hence, not all first- 
order reactions can be treated as shown above. 
Irreversible Bimolecular-Type Second-Order Reactions. Consider the re- 
action 
u 
f 
Figure 3.1 Test for the first-order rate equation, Eq. 10. 


=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 43 
with corresponding rate equation 
Noting that the amounts of A and B that have reacted at any time t are equal 
and given by CAoXA, we may write Eqs. 13a and b in terms of XA as 
Letting M = CBoICA0 
be the initial molar ratio of reactants, we obtain 
which on separation and formal integration becomes 
After breakdown into partial fractions, integration, and rearrangement, the final 
result in a number of different forms is 
Figure 3.2 shows two equivalent ways of obtaining a linear plot between the 
concentration function and time for this second-order rate law. 
Figure 3.2 Test for the bimolecular mechanism A + B -+ R with CAo # C,,, 
or for the second-order reaction, Eq. 13. 
0" 13 
C - 
0 
e - 
& 
Slope = (Ceo - CAo)k 
C ~ O  
Intercept = In - 
= In M 
c ~ O  
Slope = (CBO - CAO)k 
- 
* 
0 
t 
0 
t 
0 
t 


=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
44 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
If C, is much larger than CAo, C, remains approximately constant at all times, 
and Eq. 14 approaches Eq. 11 or 12 for the first-order reaction. Thus, the second- 
order reaction becomes a pseudo first-order reaction. 
Caution 1. In the special case where reactants are introduced in their stoichio- 
metric ratio, the integrated rate expression becomes indeterminate and this 
requires taking limits of quotients for evaluation. This difficulty is avoided if we 
go back to the original differential rate expression and solve it for this particular 
reactant ratio. Thus, for the second-order reaction with equal initial concentra- 
tions of A and B, or for the reaction 
the defining second-order differential equation becomes 
which on integration yields 
Plotting the variables as shown in Fig. 3.3 provides a test for this rate expression. 
In practice we should choose reactant ratios either equal to or widely different 
from the stoichiometric ratio. 
Caution 2. The integrated expression depends on the stoichiometry as well as 
the kinetics. To illustrate, if the reaction 
Figure 3.3 Test for the bimolecular 
or for the second-order reaction of 
0 
t 
mechanisms, A + B + R with CAo = 
Eq. 15. 


=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
3.1 
Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 45 
is first order with respect to both A and B, hence second order overall, or 
The integrated form is 
When a stoichiometric reactant ratio is used the integrated form is 
These two cautions apply to all reaction types. Thus, special forms for the 
integrated expressions appear whenever reactants are used in stoichiometric 
ratios, or when the reaction is not elementary. 
Irreversible Trimolecular-Type Third-Order Reactions. For the reaction 
A + B + D +products 
(204 
let the rate equation be 
or in terms of XA 
On separation of variables, breakdown into partial fractions, and integration, 
we obtain after manipulation 
Now if CDo is much larger than both CAo and CBo, the reaction becomes second 
order and Eq. 21 reduces to Eq. 14. 


=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
46 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
All trimolecular reactions found so far are of the form of Eq. 22 or 25. Thus 
d C ~  
- k c  C? 
A + 2 B - R  
with -rA= --- 
dt 
A 
B 
(22) 
In terms of conversions the rate of reaction becomes 
-- 
dXA - kCio (1 - XA)(M - 2XA)' 
dt 
where M = CBdCAo. On integration this gives 
Similarly, for the reaction 
dcA - kCACi 
A + B + R  
with -r,= 
--- 
dt 
integration gives 
Empirical Rate Equations of nth Order. When the mechanism of reaction is 
not known, we often attempt to fit the data with an nth-order rate equation of 
the form 
which on separation and integration yields 


=== PDF PAGE 63 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 47 
The order n cannot be found explicitly from Eq. 29, so a trial-and-error solution 
must be made. This is not too difficult, however. Just select a value for n and 
calculate k. The value of n which minimizes the variation in k is the desired 
value of n. 
One curious feature of this rate form is that reactions with order n > 1 can 
never go to completion in finite time. On the other hand, for orders n < 1 this 
rate form predicts that the reactant concentration will fall to zero and then 
become negative at some finite time, found from Eq. 29, so 
Since the real concentration cannot fall below zero we should not carry out 
the integration beyond this time for n < 1. Also, as a consequence of this feature, 
in real systems the observed fractional order will shift upward to unity as reactant 
is depleted. 
Zero-Order Reactions. A reaction is of zero order when the rate of reaction 
is independent of the concentration of materials; thus 
Integrating and noting that CA can never become negative, we obtain directly 
CAo - CA = CAoXA 
= kt for t < 
CA=O for tz- 
which means that the conversion is proportional to time, as shown in Fig. 3.4. 
As a rule, reactions are of zero order only in certain concentration ranges-the 
higher concentrations. If the concentration is lowered far enough, we usually 
Figure 3.4 Test for a zero-order reaction, or rate equation, Eq. 30. 


=== PDF PAGE 64 ===
48 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
find that the reaction becomes concentration-dependent, in which case the order 
rises from zero. 
In general, zero-order reactions are those whose rates are determined by some 
factor other than the concentration of the reacting materials, e.g., the intensity 
of radiation within the vat for photochemical reactions, or the surface available 
in certain solid catalyzed gas reactions. It is important, then, to define the rate 
of zero-order reactions so that this other factor is included and properly ac- 
counted for. 
Overall Order of Irreversible Reactions from the Half-Life t,,. 
Sometimes, for 
the irreversible reaction 
we may write 
If the reactants are present in their stoichiometric ratios, they will remain at 
that ratio throughout the reaction. Thus, for reactants A and B at any time 
CB/CA = Pla, and we may write 
Integrating for n # 1 gives 
Defining the half-life of the reaction, t,, , as the time needed for the concentration 
of reactants to drop to one-half the original value, we obtain 
This expression shows that a plot of log t,, vs. log CAo gives a straight line of 
slope 1 - n, as shown in Fig. 3.5. 
The half-life method requires making a series of runs, each at a different initial 
concentration, and shows that the fractional conversion in a given time rises 
with increased concentration for orders greater than one, drops with increased 


=== PDF PAGE 65 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 49 
log CAO 
Figure 3.5 Overall order of reaction from 
a series of half-life experiments, each at a 
different initial concentration of reactant. 
2 
00 9 
concentration for orders less than one, and is independent of initial concentration 
for reactions of first order. 
Numerous variations of this procedure are possible. For instance, by having 
all but one component, say Ain large excess, we can find the order with respect 
to that one component. For this situation the general expression reduces to 
E q 3 3 a > q S l o p e =  
1 - n  
Y 
~
~
~
0
r
d
e
r
 
< 1 
Order > 1 
J
r
=
 
where 
= k(CkOe . .) and CB CBo 
And here is another variation of the half-life method. 
Fractional Life Method t,. The half-life method can be extended to any frac- 
tional life method in which the concentration of reactant drops to any fractional 
value F = CA/CAo in time t,. The derivation is a direct extension of the half-life 
method giving 
Thus, a plot of log tF versus log CAo, as shown in Fig. 3.5, will give the reac- 
tion order. 
Example E3.1 illustrates this approach. 
Irreversible Reactions in Parallel. Consider the simplest case, A decomposing 
by two competing paths, both elementary reactions: 


=== PDF PAGE 66 ===
50 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
The rates of change of the three components are given by 
This is the first time we have encountered multiple reactions. For these in general, 
if it is necessary to write N stoichiometric equations to describe what is happening, 
then it is necessary to follow the decomposition of N reaction components to 
describe the kinetics. Thus, in this system following C,, or CR, or C, alone will 
not give both k, and k,. At least two components must be followed. Then, 
from the stoichiometry, noting that C, + CR + Cs is constant, we can find the 
concentration of the third component. 
The k values are found using all three differential rate equations. First of all, 
Eq. 34, which is of simple first order, is integrated to give 
-In - 
= (k, + k,)t 
When plotted as in Fig. 3.6, the slope is k, + k,. Then dividing Eq. 35 by Eq. 
36 we obtain the following (Fig. 3.6). 
which when integrated gives simply 
This result is shown in Fig. 3.6. Thus, the slope of a plot of CR versus Cs 
gives the ratio kllk2. Knowing k,lk2 as well as k, + k, gives k, and k,. Typical 
concentration-time curves of the three components in a batch reactor for the 
case where CRo = Cso = 0 and k, > k, are shown in Fig. 3.7. 
Reactions in parallel are considered in detail in Chapter 7. 
Homogeneous Catalyzed Reactions. Suppose the reaction rate for a homoge- 
neous catalyzed system is the sum of rates of both the uncatalyzed and cata- 
lyzed reactions, 


=== PDF PAGE 67 ===
3.1 
Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 51 
Figure 3.6 Evaluation of the rate constants for two competing elementary 
fR 
first-order reactions of the type A\ 
. 
S 
with corresponding reaction rates 
This means that the reaction would proceed even without a catalyst present and 
that the rate of the catalyzed reaction is directly proportional to the catalyst 
concentration. The overall rate of disappearance of reactant A is then 
On integration, noting that the catalyst concentration remains unchanged, we 
have 
c A 
-In - 
= -In (1 - X,) = (k, + k2Cc)t = kobserved 
t 
C~~ 
U 
t 
Figure 3.7 Typical concentration-time curves for competing reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 68 ===
52 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Figure 3.8 Rate constants for a homogeneous catalyzed reaction 
from a series of runs with different catalyst concentrations. 
Making a series of runs with different catalyst concentrations allows us to find 
k, and k,. This is done by plotting the observed k value against the catalyst 
concentrations as shown in Fig. 3.8. The slope of such a plot is k, and the 
intercept k,. 
Autocatalytic Reactions. A reaction in which one of the products of reaction 
acts as a catalyst is called an autocatalytic reaction. The simplest such reaction is 
for which the rate equation is 
Because the total number of moles of A and R remain unchanged as A is 
consumed, we may write that at any time 
Co = CA + CR = CAO + CRO = constant 
Thus, the rate equation becomes 
Rearranging and breaking into partial fractions, we obtain 
which on integration gives 


=== PDF PAGE 69 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 53 
I--------------- 
Low rate 
XA 
High rate 
Low rate 
0 
(og~ess in ti 
Start with 
Parabolic 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 3.9 Conversion-time and rate-concentration curves for autocatalytic reaction 
of Eq. 41. This shape is typical for this type of reaction. 
In terms of the initial reactant ratio M = CRdCAO and fractional conversion of 
A, this can be written as 
For an autocatalytic reaction in a batch reactor some product R must be present 
if the reaction is to proceed at all. Starting with a very small concentration of 
R, we see qualitatively that the rate will rise as R is formed. At the other extreme, 
when A is just about used up the rate must drop to zero. This result is given in 
Fig. 3.9, which shows that the rate follows a parabola, with a maximum where 
the concentrations of A and R are equal. 
To test for an autocatalytic reaction, plot the .time and concentration coordi- 
nates of Eq. 42 or 43, as shown in Fig. 3.10 and see whether a straight line passing 
through zero is obtained. 
Autocatalytic reactions are considered in more detail in Chapter 6. 
Irreversible Reactions in Series. We first consider consecutive unimolecular- 
type first-order reactions such as 
Figure 3.10 Test for the autocatalytic reaction of Eq. 41. 


=== PDF PAGE 70 ===
54 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
whose rate equations for the three components are 
Let us start with a concentration CAO of A, no R or S present, and see how the 
concentrations of the components change with time. By integration of Eq. 44 
we find the concentration of A to be 
To find the changing concentration of R, substitute the concentration of A from 
Eq. 47 into the differential equation governing the rate of change of R, Eq. 45; thus 
which is a first-order linear differential equation of the form 
By multiplying through with the integrating factor elPdn the solution is 
yeJPdn = \ QeJPdx dr + constant 
Applying this general procedure to the integration of Eq. 48, we find that the 
integrating factor is ekzt. The constant of integration is found to be -klCAol 
(k, - k,) from the initial conditions C,, = 0 at t = 0, and the final expression 
for the changing concentration of R is 
Noting that there is no change in total number of moles, the stoichiometry relates 
the concentrations of reacting components by 


=== PDF PAGE 71 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 55 
which with Eqs. 47 and 49 gives 
Thus, we have found how the concentrations of components A, R, and S vary 
with time. 
Now if k2 is much larger than k,, Eq. 50 reduces to 
Cs = C, (1 - e-ki'), 
k2 9 k1 
In other words, the rate is determined by k, or the first step of the two-step 
reaction. 
If k, is much larger than k,, then 
which is a first-order reaction governed by k,, the slower step in the two-step 
reaction. Thus, in general, for any number of reactions in series it is the slowest 
step that has the greatest influence on the overall reaction rate. 
As may be expected, the values of k, and k2 also govern the location and 
maximum concentration of R. This may be found by differentiating Eq. 49 and 
setting dCRldt = 0. The time at which the maximum concentration of R occurs 
is thus 
t,, 
= - 
- 
h o e  mean 
k2 - kl 
The maximum concentration of R is found by combining Eqs. 49 and 51 to give 
Figure 3.11 shows the general characteristics of the concentration-time curves 
for the three components; A decreases exponentially, R rises to a maximum and 
then falls, and S rises continuously, the greatest rate of increase of S occurring 
where R is a maximum. In particular, this figure shows that one can evaluate k1 
and k, by noting the maximum concentration of intermediate and the time when 
this maximum is reached. Chapter 8 covers series reactions in more detail. 
For a longer chain of reactions, say 
the treatment is similar, though more cumbersome than the two-step reaction 
just considered. Figure 3.12 illustrates typical concentration-time curves for 
this situation. 


=== PDF PAGE 72 ===
56 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
C 
Eq. 52 
0 
-I 
t 
+ 
Eq. 51 
Figure 3.11 Typical concentration-time curves 
for consecutive first-order reactions. 
First-Order Reversible Reactions. Though no reaction ever goes to completion, 
we can consider many reactions to be essentially irreversible because of the large 
value of the equilibrium constant. These are the situations we have examined 
up to this point. Let us now consider reactions for which complete conversion 
cannot be assumed. The simplest case is the opposed unimolecular-type reaction 
kl 
A 
R, 
Kc = K = equilibrium constant 
k2 
(534 
Starting with a concentration ratio M = CRdCAo the rate equation is 
Maximum of T curve 
Figure 3.12 Concentration-time curves for a chain of successive first- 
order reactions. Only for the last two compounds do the maximum and 
the inflection points occur at the same time. 


=== PDF PAGE 73 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 57 
Now at equilibrium dC,/dt = 0. Hence from Eq. 53 we find the fractional 
conversion of A at equilibrium conditions to be 
and the equilibrium constant to be 
Combining the above three equations we obtain, in terms of the equilibrium con- 
version, 
With conversions measured in terms of XAe, this may be looked on as a pseudo 
first-order irreversible reaction which on integration gives 
A plot of -In (1 - XA/XAe) 
vs. t, as shown in Fig. 3.13, gives a straight line. 
The similarity between equations for the first-order irreversible and reversible 
reactions can be seen by comparing Eq. 12 with Eq. 54 or by comparing Fig. 3.1 
with Fig. 3.13. Thus, the irreversible reaction is simply the special case of the 
reversible reaction in which CA, = 0, or XAe = 1, or Kc = m. 
t 
Figure 3.13 Test for the unimolecular type 
reversible reactions of Eq. 53. 


=== PDF PAGE 74 ===
58 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Second-Order Reversible Reactions. For the bimolecular-type second-order re- 
actions 
with the restrictions that CAo = C,, and CRo = Cso = 0, the integrated rate 
equations for A and B are all identical, as follows 
A plot as shown in Fig. 3.14 can then be used to test the adequacy of these kinetics. 
Reversible Reactions in General. For orders other than one or two, integration 
of the rate equation becomes cumbersome. So if Eq. 54 or 56 is not able to fit 
the data, then the search for an adequate rate equation is best done by the 
differential method. 
Figure 3.14 Test for the reversible bimolecular reactions of Eq. 55. 


=== PDF PAGE 75 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 59 
Figure 3.15 Behavior of a reaction that follows Eq. 57. 
Reactions of Shifting Order. In searching for a kinetic equation it may be found 
that the data are well fitted by one reaction order at high concentrations but by 
another order at low concentrations. Consider the reaction 
d C ~  
- k l C ~  
A-*R 
with -rA= -- - 
dt 
1 + k2CA 
From this rate equation we see 
At high CA-the reaction is of zero order with rate constant kllk2 
(or kzCA 1) 
At low CA-the reaction is of first order with rate constant k, 
(or kzCA 1) 
This behavior is shown in Fig. 3.15. 
To apply the integral method, separate variables and integrate Eq. 57. This gives 
To linearize, rearrange Eq. 58a to give 
Two ways to test this rate form are then shown in Fig. 3.16. 


=== PDF PAGE 76 ===
60 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
- 
a a 
2 lu 
3' 
- 
2 15 
Figure 
I 
Ea. 5 8 c 7  -- 
Slope = kl 
I 
Y' 
I 'l 
Intercept = -k2 
3.16 Test of the rate equation, Eq. 57, 
1 
Intercept = - - 
k2 
by integral analysis. 
By similar reasoning to the above we can show that the general rate form 
shifts from order m - n at high concentration to order m at low concentration, 
the transition taking place where k2Ca = 1. This type of equation can then be 
used to fit data of any two orders. 
Another form which can account for this shift is 
Mechanism studies may suggest which form to use. In any case, if one of these 
equation forms will fit the data, so will the other. 
The rate form of Eq. 57 and some of its generalizations are used to represent 
a number of widely different kinds of reactions. For example, in homogeneous 
systems this form is used for enzyme-catalyzed reactions where it is suggested 
by mechanistic studies (see the Michaelis-Menten mechanism in Chap. 2 and in 
Chap. 27). It is also used to represent the kinetics of surface-catalyzed reactions. 
In mechanistic studies, this form of equation appears whenever the rate-con- 
trolling step of a reaction is viewed to involve the association of reactant with 
some quantity that is present in limited but fixed amounts; for example, the 
association of reactant with enzyme to form a complex, or the association of 
gaseous reactant with an active site on the catalyst surface. 
FIND A RATE EQUATION USING THE INTEGRAL METHOD 
Reactant A decomposes in a batch reactor 


=== PDF PAGE 77 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 61 
The composition of A in the reactor is measured at various times with results 
shown in the following columns 1 and 2. Find a rate equation to represent the data. 
Column 1 
Column 2 
Column 3 
Column 4 
Time 
Concentration 
t, S 
CA, mollliter 
V 
Reported data 
Y 
Calculated 
SOLUTION 
Guess First-Order Kinetics. Start by guessing the simplest rate form, or first- 
order kinetics. This means that In CAo/CA vs, t should give a straight line, see 
Eq. 11 or 12, or Fig. 3.1. So column 3 is calculated and the plot of Fig. E3.la is 
made. Unfortunately, this does not give a straight line, so first-order kinetics 
cannot reasonably represent the data, and we must guess another rate form. 
First-order kinetics should 
fall on a straight line. 
These data do not, 
c~~ 
In - 
CA 
columns 1 and 3 
0 
50 
100 
200 
300 
Time t, s 
Figure E3.la 
Guess Second-Order Kinetics. Equation 16 tells that 1/C, vs. t should give a 
straight line. So calculate column 4, plot column 1 vs, column 4, as shown in Fig. 
E3.lb. Again, this does not give a straight line, so a second-order kinetic form 
is rejected. 


=== PDF PAGE 78 ===
62 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
h 
1.0 - 
Second-order kinetics should 
0.8 - 
These data do not, 
0.6 - 
1 - 
c A 
0.4 - 
columns 1 and 4 
0 1 
I 
I 
I 
I * 
0 
50 
100 
200 
300 
Time t, s 
Figure E3.lb 
Guess nth-Order Kinetics. Let's plan to use the fractional life method with 
F = 80%. Then Eq. 33b becomes 
Next take logarithms 
The procedure is as follows. First accurately plot the C, vs. t data, draw a smooth 
curve to represent the data (most important) as shown in Fig. E3.lc, then pick 
CAo = 10, 5, and 2 and fill in the following table from this figure. 
'A 
end 
Time needed 
'A0 
(= o.8cAo) 
t ~ ,  
?3 
log t~ 
log CAo 
From the curve, not the data 
I 
Next, plot log t, vs. log CAo, as shown in Fig. E3.ld and find the slope. 


=== PDF PAGE 79 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 63 
Figures E3.lc and E3.1d 
A smooth curve does not 
necessarily pass through 
all the data points 
We now have the reaction order. To evaluate the rate constant, take any point 
on the CA vs. t curve. Pick CAo = 10, for which t, = 18.5 s. Replacing all values 
into Eq. (i) gives 
1.75 
1.5 
M - 
1.25 
I 
180 215 
0 
I * 
1 .o 
from which 
A - 
- 
:. n = 1.4 
- 
I 
I * 
k = 0.005 
Therefore, the rate equation that represents this reaction is 
0 
100 
200 
300 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
mol 
rno10.~ . s 
liter. s 
Differential Method of Analysis of Data 
The differential method of analysis deals directly with the differential rate equa- 
tion to be tested, evaluating all terms in the equation including the derivative 
dC,ldt, and testing the goodness of fit of the equation with experiment. 
The procedure is as follows. 
1. Plot the CA vs. t data, and then by eye carefully draw a smooth curve to 
represent the data. This curve most likely will not pass through all the 
experimental points. 
2. Determine the slope of this curve at suitably selected concentration values. 
These slopes dC,ldt = r, are the rates of reaction at these compositions. 


=== PDF PAGE 80 ===
64 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Figure 3.17 Test for the particular rate 
Figure 3.18 Test for an nth-order rate 
form -r, = kf(C,) by the differential 
form by the differential method. 
method. 
- 
5 
d - 
w - 
b - 
,4 - 
8 
- 
* 
3. Now search for a rate expression to represent this rA vs. CA data, either by 
(a) picking and testing a particular rate form, -rA = kf (C,), see Fig. 17, or 
(b) testing an nth-order form -rA = k c :  by taking logarithms of the 
rate equation (see Fig. 3.18). 
* 
With certain simpler rate equations, however, mathematical manipulation may 
be able to yield an expression suitable for graphical testing. As an example, 
consider a set of C, vs. t data to which we want to fit the M-M equation 
Guess f (CA) 
log CA 
which has already been treated by the integral method of analysis. By the differen- 
tial method we can obtain -rA vs. CA. However, how do we make a straight- 
line plot to evaluate k, and k,? As suggested, let us manipulate Eq. 57 to obtain 
a more useful expression. Thus, taking reciprocals we obtain 
and a plot of I/(-?-,) vs. l / C A  is linear, as shown in Fig. 3.19. 
Alternatively, a different manipulation (multiply Eq. 61 by k,(-rA)lk2) yields 
another form, also suitable for testing, thus 
A plot of -rA vs. (-rA)/CA is linear, as shown in Fig. 3.19. 
Whenever a rate equation can be manipulated to give a linear plot, this becomes 
a simple way of testing the equation. So, with any given problem we must use 
good judgment in planning our experimental program. 


=== PDF PAGE 81 ===
3.1 Constant-Volume Batch Reactor 65 
- 
k; b\. 
Eq. 62 
Eq. 61 / 
-rA 
- 
Slope = - 
k l  
Figure 3.19 Two ways of testing the rate equation -rA = k,C,/(l + k,CA) 
by differential analysis. 
FIND A RATE EQUATION TO FIT A SET OF DATA USING 
THE DIFFERENTIAL METHOD 
Try to fit an nth-order rate equation to the concentration vs. time data of Exam- 
ple 3.1. 
The data are tabulated in the following columns 1 and 2 and are plotted in 
Fig. E3.2~. 
Smooth curve to 
8 
* 
Reported experimental 
6 
data, seven points 
E 
3 
2 
0 
0 
100 
200 
300 
I 
Time r, s 
Figure E3.2a 


=== PDF PAGE 82 ===
66 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Column 1 
Column 2 
Column 3 
Column 4 
Column 5 
Time 
Concentration 
Slope, from Fig. E 3 . 2 ~  
t, s 
CA, mollliter 
(dC,ldt) 
log10 ( - d C ~ / d t )  
log10 CA 
0 
10 
(10 - O)/(O - 75) = -0.1333 
-0.875 
1 .OOO 
20 
8 
(10 - O)/(-3 -94) = -0.1031 
-0.987 
0.903 
40 
6 
(10 - O)/(-21 - 131) = -0.0658 
-1.182 
0.773 
60 
5 
(8 - O)/(-15 - 180) = -0.0410 
-1.387 
0.699 
120 
3 
(6 - O)/(-10 - 252) = -0.0238 
-1.623 
0.477 
180 
2 
(4 - 1)/(24 - 255) = -0.0108 
- 1.967 
0.301 
300 
1 
(3 - I)/(-10 - 300) = -0.0065 
-2.187 
0.000 
Now carefully draw a smooth curve to represent the data and at CA = 10, 8, 
6, 5, 3, 2, 1, draw tangents to the curve, and evaluate them (see column 3). 
Next, to fit an nth-order rate equation to this data, or 
dC* - kc", 
-rA= 
dt 
take logarithms of both sides (see columns 3 and 4), or 
loglo -x 
= loglOk + nlogl0CA 
( dCA) 
----------- 
Y 
intercept J Lop: 
and plot as in Fig. E3.2b. The slope and intercept of the best line gives n and k 
(see Fig.E3.2b). So the rate equation is 
~ C A  
mol 
-rA = - - 
= (0.005 literO," ) ~ i 4 3 ,  - 
dt 
mo1°,43 . s 
liter. s 
Warning. In step 1, if you use a computer to fit a polynomial to the data it could 
lead to disaster. For example, consider fitting a sixth-degree polynomial to the 
seven data points, or an (n - 1) degree polynomial to n points. 
Fitting by eye you'd get a smooth curve, as shown in Fig. E3.2~. But if a 
computer is used to obtain a polynomial that would pass through all the points 
the result would very well be as shown in Fig. E3.2d. 
Now, which of these curves makes more sense and which would you use? This 
is why we say "draw a smooth curve by eye to represent the data." But beware, 
to draw such a curve is not that simple. Take care. 


=== PDF PAGE 83 ===
3.2 Varying-Volume Batch Reactor 67 
I 
\intercept 
= loglo k = -2.305 
k = 0.005 
Figure E3.2b 
This curve does 
This curve passes 
not pass through 
through all points 
Figure E3.2c, d The same seven points fitted by curves two different ways. 
3.2 VARYING-VOLUME BATCH REACTOR 
These reactors are much more complex than the simple constant-volume batch 
reactor. Their main use would be in the microprocessing field where a capillary 
tube with a movable bead would represent the reactor (see Fig. 3.20). 
The progress of the reaction is followed by noting the movement of the bead 
with time, a much simpler procedure than trying to measure the composition of 
the mixture, especially for microreactors. Thus, 
V, = initial volume of the reactor 
V = the volume at time t. 


=== PDF PAGE 84 ===
68 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
I Reactor, 
[Movable bead / 
Figure 3.20 A varying-volume batch reactor. 
This kind of reactor can be used for isothermal constant pressure operations, of 
reactions having a single stoichiometry. For such systems the volume is linearly 
related to the conversion, or 
where EA is the fractional change in volume of the system between no conversion 
and complete conversion of reactant A. Thus 
As an example of the use of E,, consider the isothermal gas-phase reaction 
By starting with pure reactant A, 
but with 50% inerts present at the start, two volumes of reactant mixture yield, 
on complete conversion, five volumes of product mixture. In this case 
We see, then, that E A  accounts for both the reaction stoichiometry and the 
presence of inerts. Noting that 


=== PDF PAGE 85 ===
3.2 Varying-Volume Batch Reactor 69 
we have, on combining with Eq. 63, 
Thus 
which is the relationship between conversion and concentration for isothermal 
varying-volume (or varying-density) systems satisfying the linearity assumption 
of Eq. 63. 
The rate of reaction (disappearance of component A), is, in general 
Replacing V from Eq. 63a and NA from Eq. 65 we end up with the rate in terms 
of the conversion 
or in terms of volume, from Eqs. 63 
Differential Method of Analysis 
The procedure for differential analysis of isothermal varying volume data is the 
same as for the constant-volume situation except that we replace 
dC, 
C ~ o  dV 
with -- 
c~~ 
d (In V) 
or -- 
dt 
VEA dt 
EA 
dt 
This means plot In V vs. t and take slopes. 
Integral Method of Analysis 
Unfortunately, only a few of the simpler rate forms integrate to give manageable 
V vs, t expressions. Let us look at these. 


=== PDF PAGE 86 ===
70 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Zero-Order Reactions For a homogeneous zero-order reaction the rate of 
change of any reactant A is independent of the concentration of materials, or 
Integrating gives 
As shown in Fig. 3.21, the logarithm of the fractional change in volume versus 
time yields a straight line of slope ksA/CAO. 
First-Order Reactions. For a unimolecular-type first-order reaction the rate of 
change of reactant A is 
Replacing X, by V from Eqs. 63 and integrating gives 
A semilogarithmic plot of Eq. 72, as shown in Fig. 3.22, yields a straight line of 
slope k. 
Second-Order Reactions. For a bimolecular-type second-order reaction 
2A +products 
Figure 3.21 Test for a homogeneous zero-order reaction, Eq. 69, 
in a constant-pressure, varying volume reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 87 ===
3.2 Varying-Volume Batch Reactor 71 
Eq. 72 
c 
Slope = k 
I 
0 
t 
Figure 3.22 Test for a first-order reaction, Eq. 71, 
in a constant-pressure, varying-volume reactor. 
or 
A + B -+products, 
with CAO = CBO 
the rate is given by 
Replacing XA by V from Eqs. 63 and then integrating gives, after much algebraic 
manipulation, 
Figure 3.23 shows how to test for those kinetics. 
Figure 3.23 Test for the second-order 
reaction, Eq. 73, in a constant-pressure, 
varying-volume reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 88 ===
72 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
nth-Order and Other Reactions. For all rate forms other than zero-, first-, and 
second-order the integral method of analysis is not useful. 
3.3 TEMPERATURE AND REACTION RATE 
So far we have examined the effect of concentration of reactants and products 
on the rate of reaction, all at a given temperature level. To obtain the complete 
rate equation, we also need to know the role of temperature on reaction rate. 
Now in a typical rate equation we have 
and it is the reaction rate constant, the concentration-independent term, which 
is affected by the temperature, whereas the concentration-dependent terms f(C) 
usually remain unchanged at different temperatures. 
Chemical theory predicts that the rate constant should be temperature-depen- 
dent in the following manner: 
However, since the exponential term is much more temperature-sensitive than 
the power term, we can reasonably consider the rate constants to vary approxi- 
mately as e-EIRT. 
Thus, after finding the concentration dependency of the reaction rate, we can 
then examine for the variation of the rate constant with temperature by an 
Arrhenius-type relationship 
- 
- 
This is conveniently determined by plotting In k versus 1/T, as shown in Fig. 3.24. 
If the rate constant is found at two different temperatures we have from 
Chap. 2, 
1 IT 
Figure 3.24 Temperature dependency of a reaction 
according to Arrhenius' law. 


=== PDF PAGE 89 ===
3.3 Temperature and Reaction Rate 73 
Finally, as mentioned in Chap. 2, a shift in E with temperature reflects a change 
in controlling mechanism of reaction. Since this is likely to be accompanied by 
a change in concentration dependency, this possibility should also be examined. 
Warning on Using Pressure Measures. When dealing with gases, engineers and 
chemists often measure compositions in terms of partial and total pressures, and 
then develop their rate equations in terms of pressures, without realizing that 
this can lead to problems. The reason is that the activation energy calculated 
when using these units is incorrect. Let us illustrate. 
CORRECT AND INCORRECT E VALUES 
Experimental studies of a specific decomposition of A in a batch reactor using 
pressure units show exactly the same rate at two different temperatures: 
at 400 K 
-rA = 2.3 p i  
where 
at 500 K 
-rA = 2.3pi 
PA = [atml 
(a) Evaluate the activation using these units 
(b) Transform the rate expressions into concentration units and then evaluate 
the activation energy. 
The pressure is not excessive, so the ideal gas law can be used. 
/ SOLUTION 
(a) Using Pressure Units. We see right away that a change in temperature 
does not affect the rate of reaction. This means that 
E = 0 
Alternatively, we can find E by going through the calculations. Thus 
I 
hence replacing in Eq. 75 shows that 
E = 0 
(b) Transform pA into C,, then $nd E. First write the rate equations with 
all units shown: 


=== PDF PAGE 90 ===
74 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Next change p, to C,. From ideal gas law 
1 
Combining the two preceding equations 
mol 
m3. atm 
-'A1 
= 2.3 m3. s. atm2 
82.06 X - 
mole K 
)2 (400 K)2 
At 500 K, similarly 
where 
where 
Here we see that in concentration units the rate constants are not indepen- 
dent of temperature. Evaluating the activation energy from Eq. 75, and 
replacing numbers gives 
E = 7394 mol 
I 
This example shows that E values differ when either p or C used to 
measure concentrations of materials. 
Final Notes 
1. Chemistry (collision theory or transition state theory) has developed the 
equations for reaction rates and activation energies in terms of concen- 
tration. 
2. Literature tabulations for E and -rA for homogeneous reactions are nor- 
mally based on concentrations. The clue to this is that the units for the 
rate constant are often s-l, literlmol. s, etc., without pressure appearing in 
the units. 


=== PDF PAGE 91 ===
3.4 The Search for a Rate Equation 75 
3. It is a good idea when making runs at different temperatures first to change 
all p values to C values by using the relationships 
pA = CART 
for ideal gases 
pA = zCART 
for nonideal gases, where z = compressibility factor 
and then proceed to solve the problem. This will avoid confusion on units 
later on, especially if the reaction is reversible or involves liquids and/or 
solids as well as gases. 
3.4 THE SEARCH FOR A RATE EQUATION 
In searching for a rate equation and mechanism to fit a set of experimental data, 
we would like answers to two questions: 
1. Have we the correct mechanism and corresponding type of rate equation? 
2. Once we have the right form of rate equation, do we have the best values 
for the rate constants in the equation? 
The difficult question to answer is the first of the preceding two questions. Let 
us see why this is so. 
Suppose we have a set of data and we wish to find out whether any one of 
the families of curves-parabolas, 
cubics, hyperbolas, exponentials, etc., each 
representing a different rate family-really 
fits these data better than any other. 
This question cannot be answered simply; neither can high-powered mathemati- 
cal or statistical methods help in deciding for us. The one exception to this 
conclusion occurs when one of the families being compared is a straight line. 
For this situation we can simply, consistently, and fairly reliably tell whether the 
straight line does not reasonably fit the data. Thus, we have what is essentially 
a negative test, one that allows us to reject a straight line family when there is 
sufficient evidence against it. 
All the rate equations in this chapter were manipulated mathematically into 
a linearized form because of this particular property of the family of straight 
lines that allows it to be tested and rejected. 
Three methods are commonly used to test for the linearity of a set of points. 
These are as follows: 
Calculation of k from Individual Data Points. With a rate equation at hand, 
the rate constant can be found for each experimental point by either the integral 
or differential method. If no trend in k values is discernible, the rate equation 
is considered to be satisfactory and the k values are averaged. 
Now the k values calculated this way are the slopes of lines joining the individ- 
ual points to the origin. So for the same magnitude of scatter on the graph the 
k values calculated for points near the origin (low conversion) will vary widely, 
whereas those calculated for points far from the origin will show little variation 
(Fig. 3.25). This fact can make it difficult to decide whether k is constant and, 
if so, what is its best mean value. 


=== PDF PAGE 92 ===
76 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Figure 3.25 How the location of the experimental points influences the 
scatter in calculated k values. 
Calculation of k from Pairs of Data Points. k values can be calculated from 
successive pairs of experimental points. For large data scatter, however, or for 
points close together, this procedure will give widely different k values from 
which k,,,, will be difficult to determine. In fact, finding k,,,, by this procedure 
for points located at equal intervals on the x-axis is equivalent to considering 
only the two extreme data points while ignoring all the data points in between. 
This fact can easily be verified. Figure 3.26 illustrates this procedure. 
This is a poor method in all respects and is not recommended for testing the 
linearity of data or for finding mean values of rate constants. 
Graphical Method of Fitting Data. Actually, the preceding methods do not 
require making a plot of the data to obtain k values. With the graphical method 
the data are plotted and then examined for deviations from linearity. The decision 
whether a straight line gives a satisfactory fit is usually made intuitively by 
using good judgment when looking at the data. When in doubt we should take 
more data. 
The graphical procedure is probably the safest, soundest, and most reliable 
method for evaluating the fit of rate equations to the data, and should be used 
whenever possible. For this reason we stress this method here. 
Figure 3.26 Calculated k values from successive 
experimental points are likely to fluctuate 
widely. 


=== PDF PAGE 93 ===
Problems 77 
RELATED READINGS 
Frost, A. A., and Pearson, R. G., Kinetics and Mechanism, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1961. 
Laidler, K. J., Chemical Kinetics, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965. 
PROBLEMS 
3.1. If -rA = -(dC,ldt) 
= 0.2 mol/liter.sec when CA = 1 mollliter, what is 
the rate of reaction when CA = 10 mollliter? 
Note: the order of reaction is not known. 
3.2. Liquid A decomposes by first-order kinetics, and in a batch reactor 50% 
of A is converted in a 5-minute run. How much longer would it take to 
reach 75% conversion? 
3.3. Repeat the previous problem for second-order kinetics. 
3.4. A 10-minute experimental run shows that 75% of liquid reactant is con- 
verted to product by a %-order rate. What would be the fraction converted 
in a half-hour run? 
3.5. In a homogeneous isothermal liquid polymerization, 20% of the monomer 
disappears in 34 minutes for initial monomer concentration of 0.04 and 
also for 0.8 mollliter. What rate equation represents the disappearance of 
the monomer? 
3.6. After 8 minutes in a batch reactor, reactant (CAO = 1 mollliter) is 80% 
converted; after 18 minutes, conversion is 90%. Find a rate equation to 
represent this reaction. 
Snake-Eyes Magoo is a man of habit. For instance, his Friday evenings are 
all alike-into 
the joint with his week's salary of $180, steady gambling at 
"2-up" for two hours, then home to his family leaving $45 behind. Snake 
Eyes's betting pattern is predictable. He always bets in amounts propor- 
tional to his cash at hand, and his losses are also predictable-at 
a rate 
proportional to his cash at hand. This week Snake-Eyes received a raise 
in salary, so he played for three hours, but as usual went home with $135. 
How much was his raise? 
3.8. Find the overall order of the irreversible reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 94 ===
78 Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
from the following constant-volume data using equimolar amounts of hy- 
drogen and nitric oxide: 
Total pressure, mm Hg 
200 240 280 320 360 
Half-life, sec 
1 
265 186 11.5 104 67 
3.9. The first-order reversible liquid reaction 
takes place in a batch reactor. After 8 minutes, conversion of A is 33.3% 
while equilibrium conversion is 66.7%. Find the rate equation for this re- 
action. 
3.10. Aqueous A reacts to form R (A -, R) and in the first minute in a batch 
reactor its concentration drops from CAo = 2.03 mollliter to CAf = 1.97 
mollliter. Find the rate equation for the reaction if the kinetics are second- 
order with respect to A. 
3.11. Aqueous A at a concentration C, 
= 1 mollliter is introduced into a batch 
reactor where it reacts away to form product R according to stoichiometry 
A -, R. The concentration of A in the reactor is monitored at various 
times, as shown below: 
t, min 
0 
100 200 
300 
400 
CA,mol/m3 
1000 500 
333 
250 
200 
For CAo = 500 mol/m3 find the conversion of reactant after 5 hours in the 
batch reactor. 
3.12. Find the rate for the reaction of Problem 11. 
3.13. Betahundert Bashby likes to play the gaming tables for relaxation. He does 
not expect to win, and he doesn't, so he picks games in which losses are 
a given small fraction of the money bet. He plays steadily without a break, 
and the sizes of his bets are proportional to the money he has. If at 
"galloping dominoes" it takes him 4 hours to lose half of his money and 
it takes him 2 hours to lose half of his money at "chuk-a-luck," how long 
can he play both games simultaneously if he starts with $1000 and quits 
when he has $10 left, which is just enough for a quick nip and carfare home? 
3.14. For the elementary reactions in series 
kl 
k2 
CA = CAO, 
A-R-S, 
k, = k,, 
att = 0 
C, = Cso = 0 
find the maximum concentration of R and when it is reached. 


=== PDF PAGE 95 ===
Problems 79 
3.15. At room temperature sucrose is hydrolyzed by the catalytic action of the 
enzyme sucrase as follows: 
sucrase 
sucrose -products 
Starting with a sucrose concentration CAo = 1.0 millimol/liter and an en- 
zyme concentration CEO = 0.01 millimollliter, the following kinetic data 
are obtained in a batch reactor (concentrations calculated from optical 
rotation measurements): 
Determine whether these data can be reasonably fitted by a kinetic equation 
of the Michaelis-Menten type, or 
-YA = 
k3 C~ 
where CM = Michaelis constant 
CA + Chl 
If the fit is reasonable, evaluate the constants k3 and CM. Solve by the 
integral method. 
3.16. Repeat the above problem, except this time solve by the differential 
method. 
3.17. An ampoule of radioactive Kr-89 (half life = 76 minutes) is set aside for 
a day. What does this do to the activity of the ampoule? Note that radioac- 
tive decay is a first-order process. 
3.18. Enzyme E catalyzes the transformation of reactant A to product R as 
follows: 
enzyme 
A-R, 
-rA= 200CACEO 
mol 
2 + CA liter. min 
If we introduce enzyme (CEO = 0.001 mollliter) and reactant (CAo = 10 
mollliter) into a batch reactor and let the reaction proceed, find the time 
needed for the concentration of reactant to drop to 0.025 mollliter. Note 
that the concentration of enzyme remains unchanged during the reaction. 
3.19. Find the conversion after 1 hour in a batch reactor for 
mol 
A-R, 
-rA = 3Ci5- 
CAo = I mollliter 
liter hr ' 


=== PDF PAGE 96 ===
80 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Table P3.20 
t, min 
C,H,SO,H, 
mollliter 
t, min 
C,H,S04H, 
mollliter 
3.20. M. Hellin and J. C. Jungers, Bull. soc. chim. France, 386 (1957), present 
the data in Table P3.20 on the reaction of sulfuric acid with diethylsulfate 
in aqueous solution at 22.9OC: 
Initial concentrations of H2S04 and (C,H5),SO4 are each 5.5 mollliter. Find 
a rate equation for this reaction. 
3.21. A small reaction bomb fitted with a sensitive pressure-measuring device 
is flushed out and then filled with pure reactant A at 1-atm pressure. The 
operation is carried out at 25OC, a temperature low enough that the reaction 
does not proceed to any appreciable extent. The temperature is then raised 
as rapidly as possible to 100°C by plunging the bomb into boiling water, 
and the readings in Table P3.21 are obtained. The stoichiometry of the 
reaction is 2A -+ B, and after leaving the bomb in the bath over the 
weekend the contents are analyzed for A; none can be found. Find a rate 
equation in units of moles, liters, and minutes which will satisfactorily fit 
the data. 
Table P3.21 
T, min 
n, atm 
T, min 
n-, atm 
1 
1.14 
7 
0.850 
2 
1.04 
8 
0.832 
3 
0.982 
9 
0.815 
4 
0.940 
10 
0.800 
5 
0.905 
15 
0.754 
6 
0.870 
20 
0.728 


=== PDF PAGE 97 ===
Problems 81 
3.22. For the reaction A -+ R, second-order kinetics and C, 
= 1 mollliter, we 
get 50% conversion after 1 hour in a batch reactor. What will be the 
conversion and concentration of A after 1 hour if C, 
= 10 mollliter? 
3.23. For the decomposition A -+ R, C, 
= 1 mollliter, in a batch reactor 
conversion is 75% after 1 hour, and is just complete after 2 hours. Find a 
rate equation to represent these kinetics. 
3.24. In the presence of a homogeneous catalyst of given concentration, aqueous 
reactant A is converted to product at the following rates, and C, 
alone 
determines this rate: 
C,, mollliter 
1
2
4
6
7
9
1
2
 
-r,,rnol/liter.hr 
0.06 
0.1 0.25 
1.0 2.0 
1.0 0.5 
We plan to run this reaction in a batch reactor at the same catalyst concen- 
tration as used in getting the above data. Find the time needed to lower 
the concentration of A from CAo = 10 mollliter to CAf = 2 mollliter. 
3.25. The following data are obtained at O°C in a constant-volume batch reactor 
using pure gaseous A: 
Time,min 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
m 
Partial pressure of A , m  / 
760 
600 
175 
390 
320 
275 
240 
215 
150 
The stoichiometry of the decomposition is A -. 2.5R. Find a rate equation 
which satisfactorily represents this decomposition. 
3.26. Example 3.lc showed how to find a rate equation by using the fractional 
life method where F = 80%. Take the data from that example and find 
the rate equation by using the half-life method. As a suggestion, why not 
take C, 
= 10, 6, and 2? 
3.27. When a concentrated urea solution is stored it slowly condenses to biuret 
by the following elementary reaction: 
To study the rate of condensation a sample of urea (C = 20 mollliter) is 
stored at 100°C and after 7 hr 40 min we find that 1 mol% has turned into 
biuret. Find the rate equation for this condensation reaction. [Data from 
W. M. Butt, Pak. I. Ch. E., 1, 99 (1973).] 
3.28. The presence of substance C seems to increase the rate of reaction of A 
and B, A + B + AB. We suspect that C acts catalytically by combining 
with one of the reactants to form an intermediate, which then reacts further. 
From the rate data in Table P3.28 suggest a mechanism and rate equation 
for this reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 98 ===
82 
Chapter 3 Interpretation of Batch Reactor Data 
Table P3.28 
3.29. Find the first-order rate constant for the disappearance of A in the gas 
reaction 2A + R if, on holding the pressure constant, the volume of the 
reaction mixture, starting with 80% A, decreases by 20% in 3 min. 
3.30. Find the first-order rate constant for the disappearance of A in the gas 
reaction A -+ 1.6R if the volume of the reaction mixture, starting with 
pure Aincreases by 50% in 4 min. The total pressure within the system 
stays constant at 1.2 atm, and the temperature is 25°C. 
3.31. The thermal decomposition of hydrogen iodide 
is reported by M. Bodenstein [Z. phys. chem., 29, 295 (1899)l as follows: 
Find the complete rate equation for this reaction. Use units of joules, moles, 
cm3. and seconds. 


=== PDF PAGE 99 ===
Introduction to Reactor Design 
4.1 GENERAL DISCUSSION 
So far we have considered the mathematical expression called the rate equation 
which describes the progress of a homogeneous reaction. The rate equation for 
a reacting component i is an intensive measure, and it tells how rapidly compo- 
nent i forms or disappears in a given environment as a function of the conditions 
there, or 
= f (conditions within the region of volume V) 
This is a differential expression. 
In reactor design we want to know what size and type of reactor and method 
of operation are best for a given job. Because this may require that the conditions 
in the reactor vary with position as well as time, this question can only be 
answered by a proper integration of the rate equation for the operation. This 
may pose difficulties because the temperature and composition of the reacting 
fluid may vary from point to point within the reactor, depending on the endother- 
mic or exothermic character of the reaction, the rate of heat addition or removal 
from the system, and the flow pattern of fluid through the vessel. In effect, then, 
many factors must be accounted for in predicting the performance of a reactor. 
How best to treat these factors is the main problem of reactor design. 
Equipment in which homogeneous reactions are effected can be one of three 
general types; the batch, the steady-state flow, and the unsteady-state flow or 
semibatch reactor. The last classification includes all reactors that do not fall into 
the first two categories. These types are shown in Fig. 4.1. 
Let us briefly indicate the particular features and the main areas of application 
of these reactor types. Naturally these remarks will be amplified further along 
in the text. The batch reactor is simple, needs little supporting equipment, and 
is therefore ideal for small-scale experimental studies on reaction kinetics. Indus- 
trially it is used when relatively small amounts of material are to be treated. The 
steady-state flow reactor is ideal for industrial purposes when large quantities 
of material are to be processed and when the rate of reaction is fairly high to 
extremely high. Supporting equipment needs are great; however, extremely good 


=== PDF PAGE 100 ===
84 
Chapter 4 Introduction to Reactor Design 
Composltlon at any 
polnt IS unchanged 
wlth tlme 
Composltlon 
changes 
B 
Volume and 
Volume IS constan 
but composltlon 
composltlon 
change 
IS unchanged 
changes 
(c) 
(4 
(4 
Figure 4.1 Broad classification of reactor types. (a) The batch reactor. (b) The steady-state 
flow reactor. (c), (d), and (e) Various forms of the semibatch reactor. 
product quality control can be obtained. As may be expected, this is the reactor 
that is widely used in the oil industry. The semibatch reactor is a flexible system 
but is more difficult to analyze than the other reactor types. It offers good control 
of reaction speed because the reaction proceeds as reactants are added. Such 
reactors are used in a variety of applications from the calorimetric titrations in 
the laboratory to the large open hearth furnaces for steel production. 
The starting point for all design is the material balance expressed for any 
reactant (or product). Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 4.2, we have 
rate of reactant 
rate of 
[ flow 
rzz:it into 
= [ rz:t:t 
[ 
loss due to 
+ ~ccumulation] 
flow out 
+ chemical reaction 
of reactant 
(1) 
element 
of element 
within the element 
in element 
of volume 
of volume 
of volume 
of volume 
/ 
Element of reactor volume 
Reactant disappears by reaction 
within the element 
!- Reactant accumulates 
within the element 
Figure 4.2 Material balance for an element of volume 
of the reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 101 ===
4.1 General Discussion 85 
r 
Element of reactor volume 
Heat disappears by reaction 
within the element 
Heat accumulates 
within the element 
Figure 4.3 Energy balance for an element of volume 
of the reactor. 
Where the composition within the reactor is uniform (independent of position), 
the accounting may be made over the whole reactor. Where the composition is 
not uniform, it must be made over a differential element of volume and then 
integrated across the whole reactor for the appropriate flow and concentration 
conditions. For the various reactor types this equation simplifies one way or 
another, and the resultant expression when integrated gives the basic performance 
equation for that type of unit. Thus, in the batch reactor the first two terms are 
zero; in the steady-state flow reactor the fourth term disappears; for the semibatch 
reactor all four terms may have to be considered. 
In nonisothermal operations energy balances must be used in conjunction with 
material balances. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 4.3, we have 
rate of 
rate of 
rate of heat 
rate of heat 
disappearance 
flow out of 
accumulation 
flow into 
volume 
Again, depending on circumstances, this accounting may be made either about 
a differential element of reactor or about the reactor as a whole. 
The material balance of Eq. 1 and the energy balance of Eq. 2 are tied together 
by their third terms because the heat effect is produced by the reaction itself. 
Since Eqs. 1 and 2 are the starting points for all design, we consider their 
integration for a variety of situations of increasing complexity in the chapters 
to follow. 
When we can predict the response of the reacting system to changes in op- 
erating conditions (how rates and equilibrium conversion change with tempera- 
ture and pressure), when we are able to compare yields for alternative designs 
(adiabatic versus isothermal operations, single versus multiple reactor units, flow 
versus batch system), and when we can estimate the economics of these various 
alternatives, then and only then will we feel sure that we can arrive at the 
design well fitted for the purpose at hand. Unfortunately, real situations are 
rarely simple. 


=== PDF PAGE 102 ===
86 
Chapter 4 Introduction to Reactor Design 
At the start 
t = O  
Later 
time = t 
Constant pressure -.. 
Constant volume 
Let time pass 
Or 
- 
Figure 4.4 Symbols used for batch reactors. 
Should we explore all reasonable design alternatives? How sophisticated 
should our analysis be? What simplifying assumptions should we make? What 
shortcuts should we take? Which factors should we ignore and which should we 
consider? And how should the reliability and completeness of the data at hand 
influence our decisions? Good engineering judgment, which only comes with 
experience, will suggest the appropriate course of action. 
Symbols and Relationship between CA and X, 
For the reaction aA + bB -t rR, with inerts iI, Figs. 4.4 and 4.5 show the symbols 
commonly used to tell what is happening in the batch and flow reactors. These 
figures show that there are two related measures of the extent of reaction, the 
concentration CA and the conversion XA. However, the relationship between 
CA and XA is often not obvious but depends on a number of factors. This leads 
to three special cases, as follows. 
Special Case 1. Constant Density Batch and Flow Systems. This includes most 
liquid reactions and also those gas reactions run at constant temperature and 
density. Here CA and XA are related as follows: 
c A 
X A =  1 -- 
and dXA= -- 
C~~ 
v ~ A = l  - h A = O  
for 
E A  = 
= 0 
(3) 
-- 
vxA=o 
- 1 - xA and dCA = -CAodXA 
C~~ 
FA = FAo( 1 - XA) 
-t 
U P  CAI XA 
FAO 
= moles fedlhr 
- 
uo = m3 fluid enteringthr 
If there is any 
i- 
ambiguity call these 
CAO = concentration of A 
in the feed stream 
FAfl uf, CAP XAf 
V =  volume 
Figure 4.5 Symbols used for flow reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 103 ===
4.1 General Discussion 87 
To relate the changes in B and R to A we have 
Special Case 2. Batch and Flow Systems of Gases of Changing Density but 
with T and .rr Constant. Here the density changes because of the change in 
number of moles during reaction. In addition, we require that the volume of a 
fluid element changes linearly with conversion, or V = Vo (1 + &AXA). 
X - CAO - CA 
and dXA = - 'AO(' + 'A) dcA 
A - CAO + eACA 
(CAO + EACA)' 
CA - 1 - XA 
~ C A  
- - 1 + EA 
-- 
] for 
and - 
- 
CAO 1 + EAXA 
CAO 
(1 + EAXA)~ 
~ X A  
To follow changes in the other components we have 
between 
\% = (~/Q)XA 
+ C R O / ~ A O  
for products 
1 + &AXA 
and inerts 
1 
CIO 1 + EAXA 
Special Case 3. Batch and Flow Systems for Gases in General (varying p, T, 
.rr) which react according to 
Pick one reactant as the basis for determining the conversion. We call this the 
key reactant. Let A be the key. Then for ideal gas behavior, 


=== PDF PAGE 104 ===
88 
Chapter 4 Introduction to Reactor Design 
For high-pressure nonideal gas behavior replace 
zoTor 
(z) 
by (-) , where z is 
the compressibility factor. To change to another key reactant, say B, note that 
as, - ~ E B  
CAOXA - CBOXB 
and - 
- - 
c ~ o  c ~ o  
a 
b 
For liquids or isothermal gases with no change pressure and density 
Tor 
s A + O  
and (%) -1 
and the preceding expressions simplify greatly. 
A BALANCE FROM STOICHIOMETRY 
Consider a feed CAo = 100, C,, = 200, Cio = 100 to a steady-flow reactor. The 
isothermal gas-phase reaction is 
If CA = 40 at the reactor exit, what is C,, XA, and XB there? 
First sketch what is known (see Fig. E4.1). 
Figure E4.1 
Next recognize that this problem concerns Special Case 2. So evaluate sA and 
E
~
.
 
For this take 400 volumes of gas 


=== PDF PAGE 105 ===
Problems 89 
Then from the equations in the text 
PROBLEMS 
The following four problems consider an isothermal single-phase flow reactor 
operating at steady-state and constant pressure. 
4.1. Given a gaseous feed, CAo = 100, CBO = 200, A + B +R + S, XA = 0.8. 
Find XB , CA, CB. 
4.2. Given a dilute aqueous feed, CA, = CBo = 100, A + 2B +R + S, CA = 20. 
Find XA , XB , CB . 
4.3. Given a gaseous feed, CAO = 200, CBO = 100, A + B +R, CA = 50. Find 
XA, XB, CB. 
4.4. Given a gaseous feed, CAO = CBO = 100, A + 2B +R, CB = 20. Find XA, 
XB, CA. 
In the following two problems a continuous stream of fluid enters a vessel at 
temperature To and pressure no, reacts there, and leaves at T and n. 
4.5. Given a gaseous feed, To = 400 K, no = 4 atm, CAo = 100, CBO = 200, 
A + B + 2 R , T = 3 0 0 K , n = 3 a t m , C A = 2 0 . F i n d X A , X B , C B .  
4.6. Given a gaseous feed, To = 1000 K, no = 5 atm, CAo = 100, CBO = 200, 
A + B +5R, T = 400 K, n = 4 atm, CA = 20. Find XA, XB, CB. 
4.7. A Commercial Popcorn Popping Popcorn Popper. We are constructing a 
1-liter popcorn popper to be operated in steady flow. First tests in this unit 
show that 1 literlmin of raw corn feed stream produces 28 literlmin of mixed 
exit stream. Independent tests show that when raw corn pops its volume 
goes from 1 to 31. With this information determine what fraction of raw 
corn is popped in the unit. 


=== PDF PAGE 106 ===
Chapter 3 
Ideal Reactors for a Single 
Reaction 
In this chapter we develop the performance equations for a single fluid reacting 
in the three ideal reactors shown in Fig. 5.1. We call these homogeneous reactions. 
Applications and extensions of these equations to various isothermal and noniso- 
thermal operations are considered in the following four chapters. 
In the batch reactor, or BR, of Fig. 5.la the reactants are initially charged into 
a container, are well mixed, and are left to react for a certain period. The resultant 
mixture is then discharged. This is an unsteady-state operation where composition 
changes with time; however, at any instant the composition throughout the 
reactor is uniform. 
The first of the two ideal steady-state flow reactors is variously known as the 
plug flow, slug flow, piston flow, ideal tubular, and unmixed flow reactor, and it 
is shown in Fig. 5.lb. We refer to it as the plugpow reactor, or PFR, and to this 
pattern of flow as plugpow. It is characterized by the fact that the flow of fluid 
through the reactor is orderly with no element of fluid overtaking or mixing with 
any other element ahead or behind. Actually, there may be lateral mixing of 
fluid in a plug flow reactor; however, there must be no mixing or diffusion along 
Feed 
Product 
Uniformly 
rn ixed 
Product 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 5.1 The three types of ideal reactors: (a) batch reactor, or BR; (b) plug flow 
reactor, or PFR; and (c) mixed flow reactor, or MFR. 


=== PDF PAGE 107 ===
5.1 Ideal Batch Reactor 91 
the flow path. The necessary and sufficient condition for plug flow is for the 
residence time in the reactor to be the same for all elements of fluid.' 
The other ideal steady-state flow reactor is called the mixed reactor, the 
backmix reactor, the ideal stirred tank reactor, the C* (meaning C-star), CSTR, 
or the CFSTR (constant flow stirred tank reactor), and, as its names suggest, it 
is a reactor in which the contents are well stirred and uniform throughout. Thus, 
the exit stream from this reactor has the same composition as the fluid within 
the reactor. We refer to this type of flow as mixed pow, and the corresponding 
reactor the mixed pow reactor, or MFR. 
These three ideals are relatively easy to treat. In addition, one or other usually 
represents the best way of contacting the reactants-no 
matter what the opera- 
tion. For these reasons, we often try to design real reactors so that their flows 
approach these ideals, and much of the development in this book centers 
about them. 
In the treatment to follow it should be understood that the term V, called the 
reactor volume, really refers to the volume of fluid in the reactor. When this 
differs from the internal volume of reactor, then V, designates the internal volume 
of reactor while V designates the volume of reacting fluid. For example, in solid 
catalyzed reactors with voidage E we have 
For homogeneous systems, however, we usually use the term V alone. 
5.1 IDEAL BATCH REACTOR 
Make a material balance for any component A. For such an accounting we 
usually select the limiting component. In a batch reactor, since the composition 
is uniform throughout at any instant of time, we may make the accounting about 
the whole reactor. Noting that no fluid enters or leaves the reaction mixture 
during reaction, Eq. 4.1, which was written for component A, becomes 
= o  
= O  
i d t  = o d u t  + disappearance + accumulation 
rate of loss of reactant A 
rate of accumulation 
within reactor due to 
= - ( 
of reactant A 
chemical reaction 
within the reactor 
Evaluating the terms of Eq. 1, we find 
disappearance of A 
moles A reacting 
by reaction, 
= (-rA)V = 
(volume of fluid) 
molesltime 
(time)(volume of fluid) 
accumulation of A, - dNA - d[NAo(1 - XA)] - 
~ X A  
molesltime 
dt 
dt 
- -NAO 7 
* The necessary condition follows directly from the definition of plug flow. However, the sufficient 
condition-that 
the same residence times implies plug flow-can 
be established only from the second 
law of thermodynamics. 


=== PDF PAGE 108 ===
92 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
By replacing these two terms in Eq. 1, we obtain 
Rearranging and integrating then gives 
This is the general equation showing the time required to achieve a conversion 
XA for either isothermal or nonisothermal operation. The volume of reacting 
fluid and the reaction rate remain under the integral sign, for in general they 
both change as reaction proceeds. 
This equation may be simplified for a number of situations. If the density of 
the fluid remains constant, we obtain 
For all reactions in which the volume of reacting mixture changes proportionately 
with conversion, such as in single gas-phase reactions with significant density 
changes, Eq. 3 becomes 
In one form or another, Eqs. 2 to 5 have all been encountered in Chapter 3. 
They are applicable to both isothermal and nonisothermal operations. For the 
latter the variation of rate with temperature, and the variation of temperature 
with conversion, must be known before solution is possible. Figure 5.2 is a 
graphical representation of two of these equations. 
Constant-density systems only 
Figure 5.2 Graphical representation of the performance equations for batch reactors, 
isothermal or nonisothermal. 


=== PDF PAGE 109 ===
5.1 Ideal Batch Reactor 93 
Space-Time and Space-Velocity 
Just as the reaction time t is the natural performance measure for a batch reactor, 
so are the space-time and space-velocity the proper performance measures of 
flow reactors. These terms are defined as follows: 
Space-time: 
time required to process one 
reactor volume of feed measured 
S 
(6) 
at specified conditions 
number of reactor volumes of 
feed at specified conditions which 
7 
(7) 
can be treated in unit time 
Thus, a space-velocity of 5 hr-l means that five reactor volumes of feed at 
specified conditions are being fed into the reactor per hour. A space-time of 2 
min means that every 2 min one reactor volume of feed at specified conditions 
is being treated by the reactor. 
Now we may arbitrarily select the temperature, pressure, and state (gas, liquid, 
or solid) at which we choose to measure the volume of material being fed to 
the reactor. Certainly, then, the value for space-velocity or space-time depends 
on the conditions selected. If they are of the stream entering the reactor, the 
relation between s and r  and the other pertinent variables is 
moles A entering (volume of reactor) 
r = - = - -  
moles A entering 
time 
(8) 
- V - (reactor volume) 
--- 
v, 
(volumetric feed rate) 
It may be more convenient to measure the volumetric feed rate at some 
standard state, especially when the reactor is to operate at a number of tempera- 
tures. If, for example, the material is gaseous when fed to the reactor at high 
temperature but is liquid at the standard state, care must be taken to specify 
precisely what state has been chosen. The relation between the space-velocity 
and space-time for actual feed conditions (unprimed symbols) and at standard 
conditions (designated by primes) is given by 


=== PDF PAGE 110 ===
94 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
In most of what follows, we deal with the space-velocity and space-time based 
on feed at actual entering conditions; however, the change to any other basis is 
easily made. 
5.2 STEADY-STATE MIXED FLOW REACTOR 
The performance equation for the mixed flow reactor is obtained from Eq. 4.1, 
which makes an accounting of a given component within an element of volume 
of the system. But since the composition is uniform throughout, the accounting 
may be made about the reactor as a whole. By selecting reactant A for consider- 
ation, Eq. 4.1 becomes 
= 0 
input = output + disappearance by reaction + accudation 
(10) 
As shown in Fig. 5.3, if FA, = voCAo is the molar feed rate of component A to 
the reactor, then considering the reactor as a whole we have 
input of A, molesltime = FAo(l - XAo) = FAo 
output of A, molesltime = FA = FAo(l - XA) 
disappearance of A 
moles A reacting 
volume of 
by reaction, 
= (-rA)V = 
molesltime 
((time)(volume of fluid)) ( reactor ) 
Introducing these three terms into Eq. 10, we obtain 
which on rearrangement becomes 
Uniform 1 
throughout 
Figure 5.3 Notation for a mixed reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 111 ===
5.2 Steady-State Mixed Flow Reactor 95 
where XA and rA are measured at exit stream conditions, which are the same as 
the conditions within the reactor. 
More generally, if the feed on which conversion is based, subscript 0, enters 
the reactor partially converted, subscript i, and leaves at conditions given by 
subscript f, we have 
For the special case of constant-density systems XA = 1 - CA/CAo, 
in which 
case the performance equation for mixed reactors can also be written in terms 
of concentrations or 
These expressions relate in a simple way the four terms XA, -YA, V, FAO; thus, 
knowing any three allows the fourth to be found directly. In design, then, the 
size of reactor needed for a given duty or the extent of conversion in a reactor 
of given size is found directly. In kinetic studies each steady-state run gives, 
without integration, the reaction rate for the conditions within the reactor. The 
ease of interpretation of data from a mixed flow reactor makes its use very 
attractive in kinetic studies, in particular with messy reactions (e.g., multiple 
reactions and solid catalyzed reactions). 
Figure 5.4 is a graphical representation of these mixed flow performance 
equations. For any specific kinetic form the equations can be written out directly. 
Figure 5.4 Graphical representation of the design equations for mixed flow reactor. 
rGz&q 
Constant-density systems only 


=== PDF PAGE 112 ===
96 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
As an example, for constant density systems C,IC, 
= 1 - X,, thus the perfor- 
mance expression for first-order reaction becomes 
x* - c*o - CA 
k T = - -  
for E* = 0 
1 - x* 
c* 
On the other hand, for linear expansion 
C, 
1 - x* 
- 
V = VO(l + 
and - 
- 
CAO 1 + &AX* 
thus for first-order reaction the performance expression of Eq. 11 becomes 
for any EA 
1 - X A  
For second-order reaction, A +products, -r, = kc:, E A  = 0, the performance 
equation of Eq. 11 becomes 
Similar expressions can be written for any other form of rate equation. These 
expressions can be written either in terms of concentrations or conversions. 
Using conversions is simpler for systems of changing density, while either form 
can be used for sytems of constant density. 
;I REACTION RATE IN A MIXED FLOW REACTOR 
One liter per minute of liquid containing A and B (C,, = 0.10 mollliter, CBo = 
0.01 mollliter) flow into a mixed reactor of volume V = 1 liter. The materials 
react in a complex manner for which the stoichiometry is unknown. The outlet 
stream from the reactor contains A, B, and C (CAf = 0.02 mollliter, CBf = 0.03 
mollliter, Ccf = 0.04 mollliter), as shown in Fig. E5.1. Find the rate of reaction 
of A, B, and C for the conditions within the reactor. 
CA = CAS= 0.02 rnol/lit 
CB = 0.03 molllit 
Cc = 0.04 mol/lit 
Liquid 
1 
V =  1 lit 
Figure E5.1 


=== PDF PAGE 113 ===
5.2 Steady-State Mixed Flow Reactor 97 
For a liquid in a mixed flow reactor E, = 0 and Eq. 13 applies to each of the 
reacting components, giving for the rate of disappearance: 
-rA = CAo - CA = CAO - CA - 
- 
7 
Vlv 
= 0.08 mollliter. min 
111 
cBo 
- CB - 0.01 - 0.03 
-rB = 
- 
1 
= -0.02 mollliter. min 
7 
C 0  - Cc - 0 - 0.04 - 
-rc = 
1 
-0.04 mollliter. min 
7 
L 
Thus A is disappearing while B and C are being formed. 
KINETICS FROM A MIXED FLOW REACTOR 
Pure gaseous reactant A (CAo = 100 millimollliter) is fed at a steady rate into a 
mixed flow reactor (V = 0.1 liter) where it dimerizes (2A + R). For different 
gas feed rates the following data are obtained: 
Find a rate equation for this reaction. 
Run number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
For this stoichiometry, 2A -. R, the expansion factor is 
vo, literlhr 
CAf, millimol/liter 
and the corresponding relation between concentration and conversion is 
10.0 
3.0 
1.2 
0.5 
85.7 
66.7 
50 
33.4 


=== PDF PAGE 114 ===
98 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
The conversion for each run is then calculated and tabulated in column 4 of 
Table E5.2. 
Table E5.2 
Calculated 
Given 
VOCAOXA 
Run 
V o 
c A 
X A  
V 
log CA 
log ( - 7 ~ )  
(-TA) = 
From the performance equation, Eq. 11, the rate of reaction for each run is 
given by 
VOCAOXA 
millimol 
(-rA) = 
V
'
 1 liter. hr 1 
These values are tabulated in column 5 of Table E5.2. 
Having paired values of rA and C, (see Table E5.2) we are ready to test 
various kinetic expressions. Instead of separately testing for first-order (plot rA 
VS. C,), second-order (plot rA vs. Ca), etc., let us test directly for nth-order 
kinetics. For this take logarithms of -rA = kC1, giving 
I 
log(-r,) = log k + n log CA 
For nth-order kinetics this data should give a straight line on a log (-r,) vs. log 
CA plot. From columns 6 and 7 of Table E5.2 and as shown in Fig. E5.2, the 
Slope = 3.398 - 2.602 
1.933 - 1.522 
= 1.93 - 2 
- 
Fit the lowest point 
400 = k (33.3)' 
log CA 
Figure E5.2 


=== PDF PAGE 115 ===
5.2 Steady-State Mixed Flow Reactor 99 
four data points are reasonably represented by a straight line of slope 2, so the 
rate equation for this dimerization is 
liter 
millimol 
hr . millimol) " [-] 
Comment. If we ignore the density change in our analysis (or put E, = 0 
and use CA/CAo = 1 - XA) we end up with an incorrect rate equation (reaction 
order n = 1.6) which when used in design would give wrong performance predic- 
I 
tions. 
MIXED FLOW REACTOR PERFORMANCE 
lementary liquid-phase reaction 
with rate equation 
-rA = -1. = (12.5 liter2/mo12. min)C,C; - (1.5 minW1)CR, 
2 
liter. min 
is to take place in a 6-liter steady-state mixed flow reactor. Two feed streams, 
one containing 2.8 mol Alliter and the other containing 1.6 mol Blliter, are to 
be introduced at equal volumetric flow rates into the reactor, and 75% conversion 
of limiting component is desired (see Fig. E5.3). What should be the flow rate 
of each stream? Assume a constant density throughout. 
Cia= 2.8 mol Nliter 
U A  = U B  = U 
Figure E5.3 


=== PDF PAGE 116 ===
100 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
SOLUTION 
The concentration of components in the mixed feed stream is 
C, 
= 1.4 mollliter 
CBo = 0.8 mollliter 
C, 
= 0 
These numbers show that B is the limiting component, so for 75% conversion 
of B and E = 0, the composition in the reactor and in the exit stream is 
CA = 1.4 - 0.612 = 1.1 mollliter 
CB = 0.8 - 0.6 = 0.2 mollliter or 75% conversion 
C, = 0.3 mollliter 
Writing the rate and solving the problem in terms of B we have at the conditions 
within the reactor 
= (25 mo12. 
liter' min ) (1.1 g) 
(0.2 g)' 
- (3 min-l) 
mol 
mol 
= (1.1 - 0.9) 
= 0.2 
liter. min 
liter min 
For no density change, the performance equation of Eq. 13 gives 
Hence the volumentric flow rate into and out of the reactor is 
(6 liter)(0.2 mollliter. min) 
U = 
- 
- 
- 
= 6 literlmin 
(0.8 - 0.6) mollliter 
3 literlmin of each of the two feed streams 


=== PDF PAGE 117 ===
5.3 
Steady-State Plug Flow Reactor 101 
5.3 STEADY-STATE PLUG FLOW REACTOR 
In a plug flow reactor the composition of the fluid varies from point to point 
along a flow path; consequently, the material balance for a reaction component 
must be made for a differential element of volume dV. Thus for reactant A, Eq. 
4.1 becomes 
= 0 
input = output + disappearance by reaction + accuydation 
(10) 
Referring to Fig. 5.5, we see for volume dV that 
input of A, molesltime = FA 
output of A, molesltime = FA + dFA 
disappearance of A by 
reaction, molesltime = (-r,)dV 
moles A reacting) 
= ((time)(volume of fluid) 
Introducing these three terms in Eq. 10, we obtain 
Noting that 
We obtain on replacement 
Distance through reactor 
Figure 5.5 Notation for a plug flow reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 118 ===
102 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
This, then, is the equation which accounts for A in the differential section of 
reactor of volume dV. For the reactor as a whole the expression must be inte- 
grated. Now FA,, the feed rate, is constant, but r, is certainly dependent on 
the concentration or conversion of materials. Grouping the terms accordingly, 
we obtain 
Thus 
Equation 17 allows the determination of reactor size for a given feed rate and 
required conversion. Compare Eqs. 11 and 17. The difference is that in plug flow 
rA varies, whereas in mixed flow rA is constant. 
As a more general expression for plug flow reactors, if the feed on which 
conversion is based, subscript 0, enters the reactor partially converted, subscript 
i, and leaves at a conversion designated by subscript f, we have 
For the special case of constant-density systems 
X A = l - -  
~ C A  
and dXA = - - 
C ~ o  
C ~ o  
in which case the performance equation can be expressed in terms of concentra- 
tions, or 


=== PDF PAGE 119 ===
5.3 Steady-State Plug Flow Reactor 103 
Figure 5.6 Graphical representation of the performance equations for plug flow reactors. 
pzziq 
These performance equations, Eqs. 17 to 19, can be written either in terms of 
concentrations or conversions. For systems of changing density it is more conve- 
nient to use conversions; however, there is no particular preference for constant 
density systems. Whatever its form, the performance equations interrelate the 
rate of reaction, the extent of reaction, the reactor volume, and the feed rate, and 
if any one of these quantities is unknown it can be found from the other three. 
Figure 5.6 displays these performance equations and shows that the space- 
time needed for any particular duty can always be found by numerical or graphical 
integration. However, for certain simple kinetic forms analytic integration is 
possible-and 
convenient. To do this, insert the kinetic expression for r, in Eq. 
17 and integrate. Some of the simpler integrated forms for plug flow are as follows: 
Zero-order homogeneous reaction, any constant E, 
Constant-density systems only 
First-order irreversible reaction, A + products, any constant &A, 
k7=-(1+ ln (1 - x,) 
- 
1 
(21) 
First-order reversible reaction, A * 
rR, CRdCAo = M ,  kinetics approximated or 
fitted by -r, = klCA - k2CR with an observed equilibrium conversion XAe, any 
constant &A, 
Second-order irreversible reaction, A + B +products with equimolar feed or 
2A +products, any constant E,, 


=== PDF PAGE 120 ===
104 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
Where the density is constant, put E ,  = 0 to obtain the simplified perfor- 
mance equation. 
By comparing the batch expressions of Chapter 3 with these plug flow expressions 
we find: 
(1) For systems of constant density (constant-volume batch and constant-den- 
sity plug flow) the performance equations are identical, T for plug flow 
is equivalent to t for the batch reactor, and the equations can be used 
interchangeably. 
(2) For systems of changing density there is no direct correspondence between 
the batch and the plug flow equations and the correct equation must be 
used for each particular situation. In this case the performance equations 
cannot be used interchangeably. 
The following illustrative examples show how to use these expressions. 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR PERFORMANCE 
I 
A homogeneous gas reaction A -+3R has a reported rate at 215OC 
-rA = 10-2C~2, [mollliter sec] 
Find the space-time needed for 80% conversion of a 50% A-50% inert feed to 
a plug flow reactor operating at 215OC and 5 atm (CAo = 0.0625 mollliter). 
Figure E5.4a 
For this stoichiometry and with 50% inerts, two volumes of feed gas would give 
four volumes of completely converted product gas; thus 
in which case the plug flow performance equation, Eq. 17, becomes 
1 
The integral can be evaluated in any one of three ways: graphically, numerically, 
or analytically. Let us illustrate these methods. 


=== PDF PAGE 121 ===
5.3 Steady-State Plug Flow Reactor 105 
Table E5.4 
Graphical Integration. 
First evaluate the function to be integrated at selected 
values (see Table E5.4) and plot this function (see Fig. E5.4b). 
Average height = 1.7 
Area 1.7(0.8) = 1.36 
XA 
Figure E5.4b 
Counting squares or estimating by eye we find 
0.8 1 + xA 
' I 2  
Area = lo (-) 
dXA = (1.70)(0.8) = - 
1.36 - 
Numerical Integration. 
Using Simpson's rule, applicable to an even number 
of uniformly spaced intervals on the XA axis, we find for the data of Table E5.4, 
(
2
)
'
l
2
 dXA = (average height)(total width) 
l(1) + 4(1.227) + 2(1.528) + 4(2) + l(3) 
12 
I 


=== PDF PAGE 122 ===
106 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
Analytical Integration. From a table of integrals 
0.8 1 + x* 
0 -  
dX* 
= (arc sin XA - 
The method of integration recommended depends on the situation. In this prob- 
lem probably the numerical method is the quickest and simplest and gives a 
good enough answer for most purposes. 
So with the integral evaluated, Eq. (i) becomes 
7 =  (0.0625 m~llliter)~'~ 
(1.33) = 33.2 sec 
= 
moll"lliterl". sec) 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR VOLUME 
The homogeneous gas decomposition of phosphine 
proceeds at 649OC with the first-order rate 
What size of plug flow reactor operating at 649°C and 460 kPa can produce 80% 
conversion of a feed consisting of 40 mol of pure phosphine per hour? 
Lv=? 
Figure E5.5 
I SOLUTION 
Let A = pH3, R = P4, S = H,. Then the reaction becomes 


=== PDF PAGE 123 ===
5.3 Steady-State Plug Flow Reactor 107 
with 
I 
The volume of plug flow reactor is given by Eq. 21 
Evaluating the individual terms in this expression gives 
FA, = 40 mollhr 
k = lOlhr 
PAO 
460 000 Pa 
= 
= (8.314 Pa. m31mol. K)(922 K) = 60 mol/m3 
hence the volume of reactor 
= 148 liters 
TEST OF A KINETIC EQUATION IN A PLUG FLOW 
REACTOR 
We suspect that the gas reaction between A, B, and R is an elementary revers- 
ible reaction 
and we plan to test this with experiments in an isothermal plug flow reactor. 
(a) Develop the isothermal performance equation for these kinetics for a feed 
of A, B, R, and inerts. 
(b) Show how to test this equation for an equimolar feed of A and B. 


=== PDF PAGE 124 ===
108 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
(a) Feed of A, B, R, and inerts. For this elementary reaction the rate is 
At constant pressure, basing expansion and conversion on substance A, 
Letting M = CBdCAo, M' = CRdCAO, 
we obtain 
Hence, the design equation for plug flow, Eq. 17, becomes 
In this expression 
accounts for the stoichiometry and for inerts present in 
the feed. 
(b) Equimolar feed of A and B. For CAo = CBo, CRo = 0, and no inerts, we 
have M = 1, M' = 0, 
= -0.5; hence the expression for part a reduces to 
(1 - 0.5XA)2 dXA 
j:f(xA)dxA 
(i) 
o klCAo(l - XA)' - kZXA(I - 0.5XA) this 
Having V, v,, and XA data from a series of experiments, separately evaluate 
the left side and the right side of Eq. (i). For the right side, at various XA 
t = V/uo 
Figure E5.6 


=== PDF PAGE 125 ===
5.3 Steady-State Plug Flow Reactor 109 
evaluate f (X,), then integrate graphically to give Sf (XA)dXA and then make 
the plot of Fig. E5.6. If the data fall on a reasonably straight line, then the 
suggested kinetic scheme can be said to be satisfactory in that it fits the data. 
Holding Time and Space Time for Flow Reactors 
We should be clearly aware of the distinction between these two measures of 
time, 2 and 7. They are defined as follows: 
time needed to 
mean residence time 
of flowing material 
~ X A  
0 (-YA)(~ 
+ EAXA)' [hrl 
(24) 
in the reactor 
For constant density systems (all liquids and constant density gases) 
For changing density systems 7 # 7 and 2 # Vlu, in which case it becomes difficult 
to find how these terms are related. 
As a simple illustration of the difference between 2 and 7, consider two cases 
of the steady-flow popcorn popper of Problem 4.7 which takes in 1 literlmin of 
raw corn and produces 28 literslmin of product popcorn. 
Consider three cases, called X, Y, and Z, which are shown in Fig. 5.7. In the 
first case (case X) all the popping occurs at the back end of the reactor. In the 
Case X 
Case Y 
Case Z 
+ 
28 literlmin 
28 literlmin 
1 literlmin 
1 literlmin, 
1 literlmin, 
of unpopped corn 
unpopped 
unpopped 
Figure 5.7 For the same 7 value the i values differ in these three cases. 


=== PDF PAGE 126 ===
110 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
second case (case Y) all the popping occurs at the front end of the reactor. In 
the third case (case Z) the popping occurs somewhere between entrance and exit. 
In all three cases 
V - 1 liter 
r x = r y = r z = - -  
= I min 
v, 
1 literlmin 
irrespective of where the popping occurs. However, we see that the residence 
time in the three cases is very different, or 
1 liter 
t -  
- 1 literlmin = 1 min 
1 liter 
t -  
= 2 sec 
- 28 literlmin 
7, 
is somewhere between 2 and 60 s, depending on the kinetics 
Note that the value oft depends on what happens in the reactor, while the value 
of r is independent of what happens in the reactor. 
This example shows that 7 and r are not, in general, identical. Now which is 
the natural performance measure for reactors? For batch systems Chapter 3 
shows that it is the time of reaction; however, holding time does not appear 
anywhere in the performance equations for flow systems developed in this chap- 
ter, Eqs. 13 to 19, while it is seen that space-time or VIF,, does naturally appear. 
Hence, r or VIFAO is the proper performance measure for flow systems. 
The above simple example shows that in the special case of constant fluid 
density the space-time is equivalent to the holding time; hence, these terms can 
be used interchangeably. This special case includes practically all liquid phase 
reactions. However, for fluids of changing density, e.g., nonisothermal gas reac- 
tions or gas reactions with changing number of moles, a distinction should be 
made between rand 7 and the correct measure should be used in each situation. 
Summary of Performance Equations 
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 present the integrated performance equations for single 
ideal reactors. 
REFERENCES 
Corcoran, W. H., and Lacey, W. N., Introduction to Chemical Engineering Problems, 
McGraw Hill, New York, 1970, p. 103. 
Pease, R. N., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 51,3470 (1929). 


=== PDF PAGE 127 ===


=== PDF PAGE 128 ===


=== PDF PAGE 129 ===
Problems 113 
PROBLEMS 
5.1. Consider a gas-phase reaction 2A-R + 2s with unknown kinetics. If a 
space velocity of llmin is needed for 90% conversion of A in a plug flow 
reactor, find the corresponding space-time and mean residence time or 
holding time of fluid in the plug flow reactor. 
5.2. In an isothermal batch reactor 70% of a liquid reactant is converted in 13 
min. What space-time and space-velocity are needed to effect this conver- 
sion in a plug flow reactor and in a mixed flow reactor? 
5.3. A stream of aqueous monomer A (1 mollliter, 4 literlmin) enters a 2-liter 
mixed flow reactor, is radiated therein, and polymerizes as follows: 
+A 
t A  
t A  
A-R-S-T.. 
. 
In the exit stream CA = 0.01 mollliter, and for a particular reaction product 
W, C, 
= 0.0002 mollliter. Find the rate of reaction of A and the rate of 
formation of W. 
5.4. We plan to replace our present mixed flow reactor with one having double 
the volume. For the same aqueous feed (10 mol Alliter) and the same feed 
rate find the new conversion. The reaction kinetics are represented by 
and present conversion is 70%. 
5.5. An aqueous feed of A and B (400 literlmin, 100 mmol Alliter, 200 mmol 
Blliter) is to be converted to product in a plug flow reactor. The kinetics 
of the reaction is represented by 
mol 
A + B + R ,  
-rAZ200C C 
A 
liter .min 
Find the volume of reactor needed for 99.9% conversion of A to product. 
5.6. A plug flow reactor (2 m3) processes an aqueous feed (100 literlmin) con- 
taining reactant A (CAo = 100 mmollliter). This reaction is reversible and 
represented by 
First find the equilibrium conversion and then find the actual conversion 
of A in the reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 130 ===
114 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
5.7. The off gas from a boiling water nuclear power reactor contains a whole 
variety of radioactive trash, one of the most troublesome being Xe-133 
(half life = 5.2 days). This off gas flows continuously through a large holdup 
tank in which its mean residence time is 30 days, and where we can assume 
that the contents are well mixed. Find the fraction of activity removed in 
the tank. 
5.8. A mixed flow reactor (2 m3) processes an aqueous feed (100 literlrnin) 
containing reactant A (C,, = 100 mmollliter). The reaction is reversible 
and represented by 
mol 
A 
R, 
-7, = 0.04 CA - 0.01 CR liter. min 
What is the equilibrium conversion and the actual conversion in the reactor? 
5.9. A specific enzyme acts as catalyst in the fermentation of reactant A. At a 
given enzyme concentration in the aqueous feed stream (25 literlmin) find 
the volume of plug flow reactor needed for 95% conversion of reactant 
A (C,, = 2 mollliter). The kinetics of the fermentation at this enzyme 
concentration is given by 
enzyme 
0.1 CA 
m01 
A-R, 
-rA = 1 + 0.5 C, liter. min 
5.10. A gaseous feed of pure A (2 mollliter, 100 mollmin) decomposes to give 
a variety of products in a plug flow reactor. The kinetics of the conversion 
is represented by 
A -t 2.5 (products), 
-rA = (10 min-')C, 
Find the expected conversion in a 22-liter reactor. 
5.11. Enzyme E catalyses the fermentation of substrate A (the reactant) to 
product R. Find the size of mixed flow reactor needed for 95% conversion 
of reactant in a feed stream (25 literlmin) of reactant (2 mollliter) and 
enzyme. The kinetics of the fermentation at this enzyme concentration are 
given by 
enzyme 
0.1 cA 
m01 
A-R, 
-?'A= 1 + 0.5 C, liter min 
5.12. An aqueous feed of A and B (400 literlmin, 100 mmol Alliter, 200 mmol 
Blliter) is to be converted to product in a mixed flow reactor. The kinetics 


=== PDF PAGE 131 ===
Problems 115 
of the reaction are represented by 
mol 
A + B + R ,  
-rA=200CACB liter min 
Find the volume of reactor needed for 99.9% conversion of A to product. 
5.13. At 650°C phosphine vapor decomposes as follows: 
What size of plug flow reactor operating at 649°C and 11.4 atm is needed 
for 75% conversion of 10 mollhr of phosphine in a 213 phosphine-113 
inert feed? 
5.14. A stream of pure gaseous reactant A (CAo = 660 mmollliter) enters a plug 
flow reactor at a flow rate of FA, = 540 mmollmin and polymerizes there 
as follows 
mmol 
3A+R, 
-r,=54 
liter min 
How large a reactor is needed to lower the concentration of A in the exit 
stream to CAf = 330 mmollliter? 
5.15. A gaseous feed of pure A (1 mollliter) enters a mixed flow reactor (2 liters) 
and reacts as follows: 
mol 
2A + R, 
-rA = 0.05 C i  liter. sec 
Find what feed rate (literlmin) will give an outlet concentration CA = 0.5 
mollliter. 
5.16. Gaseous reactant A decomposes as follows: 
Find the conversion of A in a 50% A-50% inert feed (v, = 180 literlmin, 
CAo = 300 mmollliter) to a 1 m3 mixed flow reactor. 
5.17. 1 literls of a 20% ozone-80% air mixture at 1.5 atm and 93°C passes 
through a plug flow reactor. Under these conditions ozone decomposes by 
homogeneous reaction 
liter 
20, +30,, 
-r,,,,, 
= kC~,on,, k = 0.05 - 
mol . s 
What size reactor is needed for 50% decomposition of ozone? This problem 
is a modification of a problem given by Corcoran and Lacey (1970). 


=== PDF PAGE 132 ===
116 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
5.18. An aqueous feed containing A (1 mollliter) enters a 2-liter plug flow reactor 
and reacts away (2A +R, -r, = 0.05 C2, mollliter s). Find the outlet con- 
centration of A for a feed rate of 0.5 literlmin. 
5.19. Pure gaseous A at about 3 atm and 30°C (120 mmollliter) is fed into a 1- 
liter mixed flow reactor at various flow rates. There it decomposes, and 
the exit concentration of A is measured for each flow rate. From the 
following data find a rate equation to represent the kinetics of the decompo- 
sition of A. Assume that reactant A alone affects the rate. 
v,, literlmin 
0.06 0.48 
1.5 
8.1 A +3R 
C, , mmollliter 
1 
30 
60 
80 
105 
5.20. A mixed flow reactor is being used to determine the kinetics of a reaction 
whose stoichiometry is A +R. For this purpose various flow rates of an 
aqueous solution of 100 mmol Alliter are fed to a 1-liter reactor, and for 
each run the outlet concentration of A is measured. Find a rate equation 
to represent the following data. Also assume that reactant alone affects 
the rate. 
v, literlmin 
1 
6 
24 
C,, mmollliter 
4 
20 
50 
5.21. We are planning to operate a batch reactor to convert A into R. This is a 
liquid reaction, the stoichiometry is A+R, and the rate of reaction is 
given in Table P5.21. How long must we react each batch for the concentra- 
tion to drop from C, 
= 1.3 mollliter to CAf = 0.3 mollliter? 
Table P5.21 
C, , mollliter 
- rA, mollliter min 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.3 
0.5 
0.4 
0.6 
0.5 
0.5 
0.6 
0.25 
0.7 
0.10 
0.8 
0.06 
1.0 
0.05 
1.3 
0.045 
2.0 
0.042 
5.22. For the reaction of Problem 5.21, what size of plug flow reactor would be 
needed for 80% conversion of a feed stream of 1000 mol Alhr at CAo = 
1.5 mollliter? 


=== PDF PAGE 133 ===
Problems 117 
5.23. (a) For the reaction of Problem 5.21, what size of mixed flow reactor is 
needed for 75% conversion of a feed stream of 1000 mol Alhr at CAO 
= 1.2 mollliter? 
(b) Repeat part (a) with the modification that the feed rate is doubled, 
thus 2000 mol Alhr at CAo = 1.2 mollliter are to be treated. 
(c) Repeat part (a) with the modification that CAo = 2.4 mollliter; however, 
1000 mol Alhr are still to be treated down to CAf = 0.3 mollliter. 
5.24. A high molecular weight hydrocarbon gas A is fed continuously to a heated 
high temperature mixed flow reactor where it thermally cracks (homoge- 
neous gas reaction) into lower molecular weight materials, collectively 
called R, by a stoichiometry approximated by A -5R. 
By changing the 
feed rate different extents of cracking are obtained as follows: 
The internal void volume of the reactor is V = 0.1 liter, and at the tempera- 
ture of the reactor the feed concentration is CAo = 100 millimol/liter. Find 
a rate equation to represent the cracking reaction. 
5.25. The aqueous decomposition of A is studied in an experimental mixed flow 
reactor. The results in Table P5.25 are obtained in steady-state runs. To 
obtain 75% conversion of reactant in a feed, CA, = 0.8 mollliter, what 
holding time is needed in a plug flow reactor? 
Table P5.25 
Concentration of A, mollliter 
Holding Time, 
In Feed 
In Exit Stream 
sec 
5.26. Repeat the previous problem but for a mixed flow reactor. 
5.27. HOLMES: You say he was last seen tending this vat . . . . 
SIR BOSS: You mean "overflow stirred tank reactor," Mr. Holmes. 
HOLMES: You must excuse my ignorance of your particular technical 
jargon, Sir Boss. 
SIR BOSS: That's all right; however, you must find him, Mr. Holmes. 


=== PDF PAGE 134 ===
118 
Chapter 5 Ideal Reactors for a Single Reaction 
Imbibit was a queer chap; always staring into the reactor, taking deep 
breaths, and licking his lips, but he was our very best operator. Why, 
since he left, our conversion of googliox has dropped from 80% to 75%. 
HOLMES (tapping the side of the vat idly): By the way, what goes on in 
the vat? 
SIR BOSS: Just an elementary second-order reaction, between ethanol 
and googliox, if you know what I mean. Of course, we maintain a large 
excess of alcohol, about 100 to 1 and . . . . 
HOLMES (interrupting): Intriguing, we checked every possible lead in 
town and found not a single clue. 
SIR BOSS (wiping away the tears): We'll give the old chap a raise-about 
twopence per week-if 
only he'll come back. 
DR. WATSON: Pardon me, but may I ask a question? 
HOLMES: Why certainly, Watson. 
WATSON: What is the capacity of this vat, Sir Boss? 
SIR BOSS: A hundred Imperial gallons, and we always keep it filled to 
the brim. That is why we call it an overflow reactor. You see we are 
running at full capacity-profitable 
operation you know. 
HOLMES: Well, my dear Watson, we must admit that we're stumped, for 
without clues deductive powers are of no avail. 
WATSON: Ahh, but there is where you are wrong, Holmes. (Then, turning 
to the manager): Imbibit was a largish fellow-say 
about 18 stone-was 
he not? 
SIR BOSS: Why yes, how did you know? 
HOLMES (with awe): Amazing, my dear Watson! 
WATSON (modestly): Why it's quite elementary, Holmes. We have all the 
clues necessary to deduce what happened to the happy fellow. But first 
of all, would someone fetch me some dill? 
With Sherlock Holmes and Sir Boss impatiently waiting, Dr. Watson 
casually leaned against the vat, slowly and carefully filled his pipe, and- 
with the keen sense of the dramatic-lit 
it. There our story ends. 
(a) What momentous revelation was Dr. Watson planning to make, and 
how did he arrive at this conclusion? 
(b) Why did he never make it? 
5.28. The data in Table P5.28 have been obtained on the decomposition of 
gaseous reactant A in a constant volume batch reactor at 100°C. The 
Table P5.28 
t, sec 
PA, atm 
t, sec 
PA, atm 
0 
1.00 
140 
0.25 
20 
0.80 
200 
0.14 
40 
0.68 
260 
0.08 
60 
0.56 
330 
0.04 
80 
0.45 
420 
0.02 
100 
0.37 


=== PDF PAGE 135 ===
Problems 119 
stoichiometry of the reaction is 2A -+ R + S. What size plug flow reactor 
(in liters) operating at 100°C and 1 atm can treat 100 mol Alhr in a feed 
consisting of 20% inerts to obtain 95% converson of A? 
5.29. Repeat the previous problem for a mixed flow reactor. 
5.30. The aqueous decomposition of A produces R as follows: 
The following results are obtained in a series of steady state runs, all having 
no R in the feed stream. 
Space Time, r, 
C,, 
, In Feed, 
CAf, In Exit Stream, 
sec 
mollliter 
mollliter 
From this kinetic information, find the size of reactor needed to achieve 
75% conversion of a feed stream of v = 1 literlsec and C,, 
= 0.8 mollliter. 
In the reactor the fluid follows 
(a) plug flow 
(b) mixed flow 


=== PDF PAGE 136 ===
Chapter 6 
Design for Single Reactions 
There are many ways of processing a fluid: in a single batch or flow reactor, in 
a chain of reactors possibly with interstage feed injection or heating, in a reactor 
with recycle of the product stream using various feed ratios and conditions, and 
so on. Which scheme should we use? Unfortunately, numerous factors may have 
to be considered in answering this question; for example, the reaction type, 
planned scale of production, cost of equipment and operations, safety, stability 
and flexibility of operation, equipment life expectancy, length of time that the 
product is expected to be manufactured, ease of convertibility of the equipment 
to modified operating conditions or to new and different processes. With the 
wide choice of systems available and with the many factors to be considered, no 
neat formula can be expected to give the optimum setup. Experience, engineering 
judgment, and a sound knowledge of the characteristics of the various reactor 
systems are all needed in selecting a reasonably good design and, needless to 
say, the choice in the last analysis will be dictated by the economics of the 
overall process. 
The reactor system selected will influence the economics of the process by 
dictating the size of the units needed and by fixing the ratio of products formed. 
The first factor, reactor size, may well vary a hundredfold among competing 
designs while the second factor, product distribution, is usually of prime consider- 
ation where it can be varied and controlled. 
In this chapter we deal with single reactions. These are reactions whose progress 
can be described and followed adequately by using one and only one rate expres- 
sion coupled with the necessary stoichiometric and equilibrium expressions. For 
such reactions product distribution is fixed; hence, the important factor in com- 
paring designs is the reactor size. We consider in turn the size comparison of 
various single and multiple ideal reactor systems. Then we introduce the recycle 
reactor and develop its performance equations. Finally, we treat a rather unique 
type of reaction, the autocatalytic reaction, and show how to apply our findings 
to it. 
Design for multiple reactions, for which the primary consideration is product 
distribution, is treated in the next two chapters. 


=== PDF PAGE 137 ===
6.1 Size Comparison of Single Reactors 121 
6.1 SIZE COMPARISON OF SINGLE REACTORS 
Batch Reactor 
First of all, before we compare flow reactors, let us mention the batch reactor 
briefly. The batch reactor has the advantage of small instrumentation cost and 
flexibility of operation (may be shut down easily and quickly). It has the disadvan- 
tage of high labor and handling cost, often considerable shutdown time to empty, 
clean out, and refill, and poorer quality control of the product. Hence we may 
generalize to state that the batch reactor is well suited to produce small amounts 
of material and to produce many different products from one piece of equipment. 
On the other hand, for the chemical treatment of materials in large amounts the 
continuous process is nearly always found to be more economical. 
Regarding reactor sizes, a comparison of Eqs. 5.4 and 5.19 for a given duty 
and for E = 0 shows that an element of fluid reacts for the same length of time 
in the batch and in the plug flow reactor. Thus, the same volume of these reactors 
is needed to do a given job. Of course, on a long-term production basis we must 
correct the size requirement estimate to account for the shutdown time between 
batches. Still, it is easy to relate the performance capabilities of the batch reactor 
with the plug flow reactor. 
Mixed Versus Plug Flow Reactors, First- and Second-Order Reactions 
For a given duty the ratio of sizes of mixed and plug flow reactors will depend 
on the extent of reaction, the stoichiometry, and the form of the rate equation. 
For the general case, a comparison of Eqs. 5.11 and 5.17 will give this size ratio. 
Let us make this comparison for the large class of reactions approximated by 
the simple nth-order rate law 
where n varies anywhere from zero to three. For mixed flow Eq. 5.11 gives 
whereas for plug flow Eq. 5.17 gives 
Dividing we find that 


=== PDF PAGE 138 ===
122 Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
With constant density, or E = 0, this expression integrates to 
Equations 1 and 2 are displayed in graphical form in Fig. 6.1 to provide a 
quick comparison of the performance of plug flow with mixed flow reactors. For 
Figure 6.1 Comparison of performance of single mixed flow and plug flow reactors 
for the nth-order reactions 
The ordinate becomes the volume ratio V,,,/Vp or space-time ratio T,,,/T~ if the 
same quantities of identical feed are used. 


=== PDF PAGE 139 ===
6.1 Size Comparison of Single Reactors n3 
identical feed composition CAo and flow rate FA, the ordinate of this figure gives 
directly the volume ratio required for any specified conversion. Figure 6.1 shows 
the following. 
1. For any particular duty and for all positive reaction orders the mixed reactor 
is always larger than the plug flow reactor. The ratio of volumes increases 
with reaction order. 
2. When conversion is small, the reactor performance is only slightly affected 
by flow type. The performance ratio increases very rapidly at high conver- 
sion; consequently, a proper representation of the flow becomes very impor- 
tant in this range of conversion. 
3. Density variation during reaction affects design; however, it is normally of 
secondary importance compared to the difference in flow type. 
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 show the same first- and second-order curves for E = 0 
but also include dashed lines which represent fixed values of the dimensionless 
reaction rate group, defined as 
k~ for first-order reaction 
kCA07 for second-order reaction 
With these lines we can compare different reactor types, reactor sizes, and 
conversion levels. 
Example 6.1 illustrates the use of these charts. 
Variation of Reactant Ratio for Second-Order Reactions 
Second-order reactions of two components and of the type 
behave as second-order reactions of one component when the reactant ratio is 
unity. Thus 
-rA = kcAcB = k c ;  
when M = 1 
(3) 
On the other hand, when a large excess of reactant B is used then its concentration 
does not change appreciably (CB = CBO) 
and the reaction approaches first-order 
behavior with respect to the limiting component A, or 
-YA = kCACB = (kCBO)CA 
= krCA 
when M + 1 
(4) 
Thus in Fig. 6.1, and in terms of the limiting component A, the size ratio of 
mixed to plug flow reactors is represented by the region between the first-order 
and the second-order curves. 


=== PDF PAGE 140 ===
u 4  Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
t 
Any rate curve 
Figure 6.2 Comparison of performance of 
mixed flow and plug flow reactors for any reac- 
tion kinetics. 
General Graphical Comparison 
For reactions with arbitrary but known rate the performance capabilities of 
mixed and plug flow reactors are best illustrated in Fig. 6.2. The ratio of shaded 
and of hatched areas gives the ratio of space-times needed in these two reactors. 
The rate curve drawn in Fig. 6.2 is typical of the large class of reactions whose 
rate decreases continually on approach to equilibrium (this includes all nth-order 
reactions, n > 0). For such reactions it can be seen that mixed flow always needs 
a larger volume than does plug flow for any given duty. 
6.2 MULTIPLE-REACTOR SYSTEMS 
Plug Flow Reactors in Series andlor in Parallel 
Consider N plug flow reactors connected in series, and let XI, X,, . . . , X, be 
the fractional conversion of component A leaving reactor 1, 2, . . . , N. Basing 
the material balance on the feed rate of A to the first reactor, we find for the 
ith reactor from Eq. 5.18 
or for the N reactors in series 
Hence, N plug flow reactors in series with a total volume V gives the same 
conversion as a single plug flow reactor of volume V. 


=== PDF PAGE 141 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems 125 
For the optimum hook up of plug flow reactors connected in parallel or in 
any parallel-series combination, we can treat the whole system as a single plug 
flow reactor of volume equal to the total volume of the individual units if the 
feed is distributed in such a manner that fluid streams that meet have the same 
composition. Thus, for reactors in parallel VIF or T must be the same for each 
parallel line. Any other way of feeding is less efficient. 
OPERATING A NUMBER OF PLUG FLOW REACTORS 
e reactor setup shown in Fig. E6.1 consists of three plug flow reactors in two 
parallel branches. Branch D has a reactor of volume 50 liters followed by a 
reactor of volume 30 liters. Branch E has a reactor of volume 40 liters. What 
fraction of the feed should go to branch D? 
Figure E6.1 
Branch D consists of two reactors in series; hence, it may be considered to be 
a single reactor of volume 
VD = 50 + 30 = 80 liters 
Now for reactors in parallel VIF must be identical if the conversion is to be the 
same in each branch. Therefore, 
I 
Therefore, two-thirds of the feed must be fed to branch D. 


=== PDF PAGE 142 ===
126 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
CA in 
\ 
I 
\ \ 
Single mixed flow reactor, N = 1 
I 
* C~ out 
Figure 6.3 Concentration profile through an N-stage mixed flow reactor system 
compared with single flow reactors. 
Equal-Size Mixed Flow Reactors in Series 
In plug flow, the concentration of reactant decreases progressively through the 
system; in mixed flow, the concentration drops immediately to a low value. 
Because of this fact, a plug flow reactor is more efficient than a mixed flow 
reactor for reactions whose rates increase with reactant concentration, such as 
nth-order irreversible reactions, n > 0. 
Consider a system of N mixed flow reactors connected in series. Though the 
concentration is uniform in each reactor, there is, nevertheless, a change in 
concentration as fluid moves from reactor to reactor. This stepwise drop in 
concentration, illustrated in Fig. 6.3, suggests that the larger the number of units 
in series, the closer should the behavior of the system approach plug flow. This 
will be shown to be so. 
Let us now quantitatively evaluate the behavior of a series of N equal-size 
mixed flow reactors. Density changes will be assumed to be negligible; hence 
E = 0 and t = 7. As a rule, with mixed flow reactors it is more convenient to 
develop the necessary equations in terms of concentrations rather than fractional 
conversions; therefore, we use this approach. The nomenclature used is shown 
in Fig. 6.4 with subscript i referring to the ith vessel. 
Figure 6.4 Notation for a system of N equal-size mixed reactors in series. 


=== PDF PAGE 143 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems n7 
First-Order Reactions. From Eq. 5.12 a material balance for component A 
about vessel i gives 
Because E = 0 this may be written in terms of concentrations. Hence 
Now the space-time r (or mean residence time t) is the same in all the equal- 
size reactors of volume Vi. Therefore, 
Rearranging, we find for the system as a whole 
In the limit, for N + m, this equation reduces to the plug flow equation 
With Eqs. 6b and 7 we can compare performance of N reactors in series with a 
plug flow reactor or with a single mixed flow reactor. This comparison is shown 
in Fig. 6.5 for first-order reactions in which density variations are negligible. 
Second-Order Reactions. We may evaluate the performance of a series of 
mixed flow reactors for a second-order, bimolecular-type reaction, no excess of 
either reactant, by a procedure similar to that of a first-order reaction. Thus, for 


=== PDF PAGE 144 ===
128 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Figure 6.5 Comparison of performance of a series of N equal-size mixed flow 
reactors with a plug flow reactor for the first-order reaction 
For the same processing rate of identical feed the ordinate measures the volume 
ratio V,IV, directly. 
N reactors in series we find 
whereas for plug flow 
A comparison of the performance of these reactors is shown in Fig. 6.6. 
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 support our intuition by showing that the volume of system 
required for a given conversion decreases to plug flow volume as the number of 
reactors in series is increased, the greatest change taking place with the addition 
of a second vessel to a one-vessel system. 


=== PDF PAGE 145 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems f29 
Figure 6.6 Comparison of performance of a series of N equal-size mixed flow 
reactors with a plug flow reactor for elementary second-order reactions 
with negligible expansion. For the same processing rate of identical feed the 
ordinate measures the volume ratio vN/Vp or space-time ratio rN/rp directly. 
MIXED FLOW REACTORS IN SERIES 
At present 90% of reactant A is converted into product by a second-order reaction 
in a single mixed flow reactor. We plan to place a second reactor similar to the 
one being used in series with it. 
(a) For the same treatment rate as that used at present, how will this addition 
affect the conversion of reactant? 
(b) For the same 90% conversion, by how much can the treatment rate be in- 
creased? 


=== PDF PAGE 146 ===
130 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
The sketch of Fig. E6.2 shows how the performance chart of Fig. 6.6 can be used 
to help solve this problem. 
100 
1 
0.01 
Figure E6.2 
(a) Find the conversion for the same treatment rate. For the single reactor at 
90% conversion we have from Fig. 6.6 
kCor = 90 
For the two reactors the space-time or holding time is doubled; hence, the 
operation will be represented by the dashed line of Fig. 6.6 where 
kCor = 180 
This line cuts the N = 2 line at a conversion X = 97.4%, point a. 
(b) Find the treatment rate for the same conversion. Staying on the 90% conver- 
sion line, we find for N = 2 that 
kC,r = 27.5, 
point b 
Comparing the value of the reaction rate group for N = 1 and N = 2, we find 
(kC07),=, - 7 ~ = 2  - ( V / V ) N = ~  
27.5 
(kc,~),=, 
T N = ~  (
V
)
 90 


=== PDF PAGE 147 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems 131 
I 
Since V,=, = 2V,,, 
the ratio of flow rates becomes 
Thus, the treatment rate can be raised to 6.6 times the original. 
Note. If the second reactor had been operated in parallel with the original unit 
then the treatment rate could only be doubled. Thus, there is a definite advantage 
in operating these two units in series. This advantage becomes more pronounced 
at higher conversions. 
Mixed Flow Reactors of Different Sizes in Series 
For arbitrary kinetics in mixed flow reactors of different size, two types of 
questions may be asked: how to find the outlet conversion from a given reactor 
system, and the inverse question, how to find the best setup to achieve a given 
conversion. Different procedures are used for these two problems. We treat 
them in turn. 
Finding the Conversion in a Given System A graphical procedure for finding 
the outlet composition from a series of mixed flow reactors of various sizes for 
reactions with negligible density change has been presented by Jones (1951). All 
that is needed is an r versus C curve for component A to represent the reaction 
rate at various concentrations. 
Let us illustrate the use of this method by considering three mixed flow reactors 
in series with volumes, feed rates, concentrations, space-times (equal to residence 
times because E = O), and volumetric flow rates as shown in Fig. 6.7. Now from 
Eq. 5.11, noting that E = 0, we may write for component A in the first reactor 
Figure 6.7 Notation for a series of unequal-size mixed flow reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 148 ===
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Rate versus 
(from 
(from 
Eq. 9) 
Eq. 10) 
C3 c2 
c1 
co 
Reactant concentration 
Figure 6.8 Graphical procedure for finding compositions in a series 
of mixed flow reactors. 
Similarly, from Eq. 5.12 for the ith reactor we may write 
Plot the C versus r curve for component A and suppose that it is as shown in 
Fig. 6.8. To find the conditions in the first reactor note that the inlet concentration 
Co is known (point L), that C, and ( - r ) ,  correspond to a point on the curve to 
be found (point M), and that the slope of the line LM = MNINL = (-r),l 
(C, - Co) = -(l/rl) from Eq. 6.9. Hence, from Co draw a line of slope -(l/r,) 
until it cuts the rate curve; this gives C1. Similarly, we find from Eq. 6.10 that a 
line of slope -(11r2) from point N cuts the curve at P, giving the concentration 
C2 of material leaving the second reactor. This procedure is then repeated as 
many times as needed. 
With slight modification this graphical method can be extended to reactions 
in which density changes are appreciable. 
Determining the Best System for a Given Conversion. Suppose we want to 
find the minimum size of two mixed flow reactors in series to achieve a specified 
conversion of feed which reacts with arbitrary but known kinetics. The basic 
performance expressions, Eqs. 5.11 and 5.12, then give, in turn, for the first reactor 
and for the second reactor 
These relationships are displayed in Fig. 6.9 for two alternative reactor arrange- 
ments, both giving the same final conversion X2. Note, as the intermediate 


=== PDF PAGE 149 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems 133 
Area measures 
size of first unit 
Of second unit 
0 
Figure 6.9 Graphical representation of the variables for two mixed flow reactors in series. 
conversion XI changes, so does the size ratio of the units (represented by the 
two shaded areas) as well as the total volume of the two vessels required (the 
total area shaded). 
Figure 6.9 shows that the total reactor volume is as small as possible (total 
shaded area is minimized) when the rectangle KLMN is as large as possible. 
This brings us to the problem of choosing XI (or point M on the curve) so as 
to maximize the area of this rectangle. Consider this general problem. 
Maximization of Rectangles. In Fig. 6.10, construct a rectangle between the 
x-y axes and touching the arbitrary curve at point M(x, y). The area of the 
rectangle is then 
Figure 6.10 Graphical procedure for maximizing the area of a rectangle. 


=== PDF PAGE 150 ===
134 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
This area is maximized when 
or when 
In words, this condition means that the area is maximized when M is at that 
point where the slope of the curve equals the slope of the diagonal NL of the 
rectangle. Depending on the shape of the curve, there may be more than one 
or there may be no "best" point. However, for nth-order kinetics, n > 0, there 
always is just one "best" point. 
We will use this method of maximizing a rectangle in later chapters. But let 
us return to our problem. 
The optimum size ratio of the two reactors is achieved where the slope of the 
rate curve at M equals the diagonal NL. The best value of M is shown in Fig. 
6.11, and this determines the intermediate conversion X, as well as the size of 
units needed. 
The optimum size ratio for two mixed flow reactors in series is found in general 
to be dependent on the kinetics of the reaction and on the conversion level. For 
the special case of first-order reactions equal-size reactors are best; for reaction 
orders n > 1 the smaller reactor should come first; for n < 1 the larger should 
come first (see Problem 6.3). However, Szepe and Levenspiel (1964) show that 
the advantage of the minimum size system over the equal-size system is quite 
small, only a few percent at most. Hence, overall economic consideration would 
nearly always recommend using equal-size units. 
The above procedure can be extended directly to multistage operations; how- 
ever, here the argument for equal-size units is stronger still than for the two- 
stage system. 
Diagonal of 
rectangle \ , 
f slope of 
curve at 
M 
Figure 6.11 Maximization of rectan- 
gles applied to find the optimum in- 
termediate conversion and optimum 
sizes of two mixed flow reactors in 
series. 


=== PDF PAGE 151 ===
6.2 Multiple-Reactor Systems 135 
Figure 6.12 Graphical design procedure for reactors in series. 
Reactors of Different Types in Series 
If reactors of different types are put in series, such as a mixed flow reactor 
followed by a plug flow reactor which in turn is followed by another mixed flow 
reactor, we may write for the three reactors 
These relationships are represented in graphical form in Fig. 6.12. This allows us 
to predict the overall conversions for such systems, or conversions at intermediate 
points between the individual reactors. These intermediate conversions may be 
needed to determine the duty of interstage heat exchangers. 
Best Arrangement of a Set of Ideal Reactors. For the most effective use of a 
given set of ideal reactors we have the following general rules: 
1. For a reaction whose rate-concentration curve rises monotonically (any 
nth-order reaction, n > 0) the reactors should be connected in series. They 
should be ordered so as to keep the concentration of reactant as high as 
possible if the rate-concentration curve is concave (n > I), and as low as 
possible if the curve is convex (n < 1). As an example, for the case of Fig. 
6.12 the ordering of units should be plug, small mixed, large mixed, for 
n > 1; the reverse order should be used when n < 1. 
2. For reactions where the rate-concentration curve passes through a maximum 
or minimum the arrangement of units depends on the actual shape of curve, 
the conversion level desired, and the units available. No simple rules can 
be suggested. 
3. Whatever may be the kinetics and the reactor system, an examination of 
the ll(-r,) 
vs. CA curve is a good way to find the best arrangement of 
units. 
The problems at the end of this chapter illustrate these findings. 


=== PDF PAGE 152 ===
136 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
6.3 RECYCLE REACTOR 
In certain situations it is found to be advantageous to divide the product stream 
from a plug flow reactor and return a portion of it to the entrance of the reactor. 
Let the recycle ratio R be defined as 
volume of fluid returned to the reactor entrance 
R =  
volume leaving the system 
(15) 
This recycle ratio can be made to vary from zero to infinity. Reflection suggests 
that as the recycle ratio is raised the behavior shifts from plug flow (R = 0) to 
mixed flow (R = m). Thus, recycling provides a means for obtaining various 
degrees of backmixing with a plug flow reactor. Let us develop the performance 
equation for the recycle reactor. 
Consider a recycle reactor with nomenclature as shown in Fig. 6.13. Across 
the reactor itself Eq. 5.18 for plug flow gives 
v - \;=xw 
5 
-- 
FA, 
-'.A 
where FAo would be the feed rate of A if the stream entering the reactor (fresh 
feed plus recycle) were unconverted. Since FAo and X,, are not known directly, 
they must be written in terms of known quantities before Eq. 16 can be used. 
Let us now do this. 
The flow entering the reactor includes both fresh feed and the recycle stream. 
Measuring the flow split at point L (point K will not do if E f 0) we then have 
A which would enter in an 
A entering in 
FA0 = ( unconverted recycle stream 
fresh feed 
(17) 
Now to the evaluation of XA1: from Eq. 4.5 we may write 
Because the pressure is taken to be constant, the streams meeting at point K 
may be added directly. This gives 
F ~ 3  
Figure 6.13 Nomenclature for the recycle reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 153 ===
6.3 Recycle Reactor 137 
Combining Eqs. 18 and 19 gives XA, in terms of measured quantities, or 
Finally, on replacing Eqs. 17 and 20 in Eq. 16 we obtain the useful form for 
the performance equation for recycle reactors, good for any kinetics, any F value 
and for XA, = 0. 
For the special case where density changes are negligible we may write this 
equation in terms of concentrations, or 
These expressions are represented graphically in Fig. 6.14. 
for any 6 
only for E = 0 
Figure 6.14 Representation of the performance equation for recy- 
cle reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 154 ===
138 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
For the extremes of negligible and infinite recycle the system approaches plug 
flow and mixed flow, or 
------------- 
- -, 
- - - - - - - - - 
plug flow 
mixed flow 
The approach to these extremes is shown in Fig. 6.15. 
Integration of the recycle equation gives, for first-order reaction, E ,  = 0, 
and for second-order reaction, 2A + products, -r, = kc;, 
E ,  = 0, 
(24) 
The expressions for E ,  f 0 and for other reaction orders can be evaluated, but 
are more cumbersome. 
Figure 6.15 The recycle extremes approach plug flow (R +0) and 
mixed flow (R + a). 


=== PDF PAGE 155 ===
6.3 Recycle Reactor 139 
Figure 6.16 Comparison of performance of recycle and plug flow for first-order re- 
actions 
Figures 6.16 and 6.17 show the transition from plug to mixed flow as R increases, 
and a match of these curves with those for N tanks in series (Figs. 6.5 and 6.6) 
gives the following rough comparison for equal performance: 
The recycle reactor is a convenient way for approaching mixed flow with what 
is essentially a plug flow device. Its particular usefulness is with solid catalyzed 
reactions with their fixed bed contactors. We meet this and other applications 
of recycle reactors in later chapters. 
No. 
of 
tanks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
10 
CQ 
R for first-order 
R for second-order 
reaction 
reaction 
at XA = 0.5 
0.90 
0.99 
at XA = 0.5 
0.90 
0.99 
w 
w 
CC] 
CO 
CO 
CO 
1.0 
2.2 
5.4 
1.0 
2.8 
7.5 
0.5 
1.1 
2.1 
0.5 
1.4 
2.9 
0.33 
0.68 
1.3 
0.33 
0.90 
1.7 
0.11 
0.22 
0.36 
0.11 
0.29 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 


=== PDF PAGE 156 ===
140 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Figure 6.17 Comparison of performance of recycle reactors with plug flow 
reactors for elementary second-order reactions (Personal communication, 
from T. J. Fitzgerald and P. Fillesi): 
2A -+products, 
E = 0 
A + B +products, 
C,, = C,, with E = 0 
6.4 AUTOCATALYTIC REACTIONS 
When a material reacts away by any nth order rate (n > 0) in a batch reactor, 
its rate of disappearance is rapid at the start when the concentration of reactant 
is high. This rate then slows progressively as reactant is consumed. In an autocata- 
lytic reaction, however, the rate at the start is low because little product is present; 
it increases to a maximum as product is formed and then drops again to a low 
value as reactant is consumed. Figure 6.18 shows a typical situation. 
Reactions with such rate-concentration curves lead to interesting optimization 
problems. In addition, they provide a good illustration of the general design 
method presented in this chapter. For these reasons let us examine these reactions 
in some detail. In our approach we deal exclusively with their ll(-r,) 
versus 
X, curves with their characteristic minima, as shown in Fig. 6.18. 


=== PDF PAGE 157 ===
6.4 Autocatalytic Reactions 141 
CA 
Figure 6.18 Typical rate-concentration 
for example: 
Point of 
maximum 
Progress 
of reaction 
curve for autocatalytic reactions, 
Plug Flow Versus Mixed Flow Reactor, No Recycle. For any particular rate- 
concentration curve a comparison of areas in Fig. 6.19 will show which reactor 
is superior (which requires a smaller volume) for a given job. We thus find 
1. At low conversion the mixed reactor is superior to the plug flow reactor. 
2. At high enough conversions the plug flow reactor is superior. 
These findings differ from ordinary nth-order reactions (n > 0) where the plug 
flow reactor is always more efficient than the mixed flow reactor. In addition, 
we should note that a plug flow reactor will not operate at all with a feed of 
pure reactant. In such a situation the feed must be continually primed with 
product, an ideal opportunity for using a recycle reactor. 
Figure 6.19 For autocatalytic reactions mixed flow is more efficient at low conversions, plug 
flow is more efficient at high conversions. 


=== PDF PAGE 158 ===
142 Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Optimum Recycle Operations. When material is to be processed to some fixed 
final conversion XAf in a recycle reactor, reflection suggests that there must be 
a particular recycle ratio which is optimum in that it minimizes the reactor volume 
or space-time. Let us determine this value of R. 
The optimum recycle ratio is found by differentiating Eq. 21 with respect to 
R and setting to zero, thus 
7 
take 
R + 1 
d R  
~ X A  
(25) 
Ai ~
t
l
 
This operation requires differentiating under an integral sign. From the theorems 
of calculus, if 
then 
For our case, Eq. 25, we then find 
where 
Combining and rearranging then gives for the optimum 
In words, the optimum recycle ratio introduces to the reactor a feed whose 
ll(-r,) value (KL in Fig. 6.20) equals the average ll(-rA) value in the reactor 
as a whole (PQ in Fig. 6.20). Figure 6.20 compares this optimum with conditions 
where the recycle is either too high or too low. 


=== PDF PAGE 159 ===
6.4 Autocatalytic Reactions 143 
I Recycle just right I 
Figure 6.20 Correct recycle ratio for an autocatalytic reaction compared with recycle ratios which 
are too high and too low. 
Occurrence of Autocatalytic Reactions. The most important examples of auto- 
catalytic reactions are the broad class of fermentation reactions which result 
from the reaction of microorganism on an organic feed. When they can be treated 
as single reactions, the methods of this chapter can be applied directly. Another 
type of reaction which has autocatalytic behavior is the exothermic reaction (say, 
the combustion of fuel gas) proceeding in an adiabatic manner with cool reactants 
entering the system. In such a reaction, called autothermal, heat may be consid- 
ered to be the product which sustains the reaction. Thus, with plug flow the 
reaction will die. With backmixing the reaction will be self-sustaining because 
the heat generated by the reaction can raise fresh reactants to a temperature at 
which they will react. Autothermal reactions are of great importance in solid 
catalyzed gas-phase systems and are treated later in the book. 
Reactor Combinations 
For autocatalytic reactions all sorts of reactor arrangements are to be considered 
if product recycle or product separation with recycle is allowable. In general, 
for a rate-concentration curve as shown in Fig. 6.21 one should always try to 
reach point M in one step (using mixed flow in a single reactor), then follow 
with plug flow or as close to plug flow as possible. This procedure is shown as 
the shaded area in Fig. 6.21a. 
When separation and reuse of unconverted reactant is possible, operate at 
point M (see Fig. 6.21b). 
The volume required is now the very minimum, less than any of the previous 
ways of operating. However, the overall economics, including the cost of separa- 
tion and of recycle, will determine which scheme is the optimum overall. 


=== PDF PAGE 160 ===
144 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Product 
' ~ f  
C ~ o  
CAO 
Separator 
recycle 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6.21 (a) The best multiple reactor scheme. (b) The best scheme when uncon- 
verted reactant can be separated and recycled. 
FINDING THE BEST REACTOR SETUP 
In the presence of a specific enzyme E, which acts as a homogeneous catalyst, 
a harmful organic A present in industrial waste water degrades into harmless 
chemicals. At a given enzyme concentration C, tests in a laboratory mixed flow 
reactor give the following results: 
We wish to treat 0.1 m3/min of this waste water having C,, 
= 10 mmol/m3 to 
90% conversion with this enzyme at concentration C,. 
C,, 
, mmol/m3 
C, , mmol/m3 
r, min 
(a) One possibility is to use a long tubular reactor (assume plug flow) with 
possible recycle of exit fluid. What design do you recommend? Give the 
size of the reactor, tell if it should be used with recycle, and if so determine 
the recycle flow rate in cubic meters per minute (m3/min). Sketch your 
recommended design. 
(b) Another possibility is to use one or two stirred tanks (assume ideal). What 
two-tank design do you recommend, and how much better is it than the 
one-tank arrangement? 
(c) What arrangement of plug flow and mixed flow reactors would you use to 
minimize the total volume of reactors needed? Sketch your recommended 
design and show the size of units selected. We should mention that separa- 
tion and recycle of part of the product stream is not allowed. 
2 
5 
6 
6 11 
14 16 24 
0 . 5 3  
1
2
 6 1 0  8 
4 
30 
1 50 
8 
4 
20 
20 
4 


=== PDF PAGE 161 ===
6.4 Autocatalytic Reactions 145 
SOLUTION 
First calculate and tabulate 11-r, at the measured C,. This is shown as the last 
line of Table E6.3. Next, draw the 11-r, vs. C, curve. This is seen to be U- 
shaped (see Figs. E6.3a, b, c) so we must prepare to deal with an autocatalytic 
type reacting system. 
Table E6.3 
Part (a) Solution. From the -l/r, vs. C, curve we see that we should use plug 
flow with recycle. From Fig. E 6 . 3 ~  
we find 
C, 
mmol/m3 
C,, mmol/m3 
7,min 
1 - 
-- 
7 
m y  min 
-r, 
C, - C, ' mmol 
V = 7U0 = area (u,) = [(lo - 1)(1.2)](0.1) = 1.08 m3 
v, = u,R = O.l(O.607) = 0.0607 mVmin 
2 
5 
6 
6 
11 
14 
16 
24 
0.5 
3 
1
2
6
 1
0
8
 
4 
30 
1 
50 
8 
4 
20 
20 
4 
20 
0.5 
10 
2 
0.8 
5 
2.5 
0.2 
rn mol 
- 
m3 
I 
Figure E6.3a Plug flow with recycle. 


=== PDF PAGE 162 ===
146 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
Part (b) Solution. Drawing slopes and diagonals according to the method of 
maximization of rectangles we end up with Fig. E6.3b. 
"2 
Area2 = .r2 = 
= (2.6 - 1)10 = 16 min 
A 
/ 
- 1)10 = 90 min 
(10 - 2.6)0.8 = 5.92 min 
\ 
m mol 
\ 
C A ! , ~  
Figure E6.3b One and two mixed flow reactors in series. 
For 1 tank 
V = n, = 90(0.1) = 9.0 m3 
Vl = T ~ V  
= 5.92(0.1) = 0.59 
For 2 tanks 
Vtotal = 2.19 m3 
V, = T2V = 16(0.1) = 1.6 m3 
Part (c) Solution. Following the reasoning in this chapter we should use a mixed 
flow reactor followed by a plug flow reactor. So with Fig. E 6 . 3 ~  
we find 
By graphical integration 
m mol 
CA, - 
m3 
Figure E 6 . 3 ~  Arrangement with smallest volume. 


=== PDF PAGE 163 ===
Problems 1147 
For the MFR V,n = U T ,  = O.l(l.2) = 0.12 m3 
Vtotal = 0.7 m3 
For the PFR 
V, = u?, = 0.1(5.8) = 0.58 m3 
Note which scheme (a) or (b) or (c) gives the smallest size of reactors. 
REFERENCES 
Jones, R. W., Chem. Eng. Progr., 47,46 (1951). 
Szepe, S., and 0. Levenspiel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Design Deuelop., 3, 214 (1964). 
PROBLEMS 
6.1. A liquid reactant stream (1 mollliter) passes through two mixed flow reac- 
tors in a series. The concentration of A in the exit of the first reactor is 
0.5 mollliter. Find the concentration in the exit stream of the second reactor. 
The reaction is second-order with respect to A and V2/V, = 2. 
6.2. Water containing a short-lived radioactive species flows continuously 
through a well-mixed holdup tank. This gives time for the radioactive 
material to decay into harmless waste. As it now operates, the activity of 
the exit stream is 117 of the feed stream. This is not bad, but we'd like to 
lower it still more. 
One of our office secretaries suggests that we insert a baffle down the 
middle of the tank so that the holdup tank acts as two well-mixed tanks 
in series. Do you think this would help? If not, tell why; if so, calculate 
the expected activity of the exit stream compared to the entering stream. 
6.3. An aqueous reactant stream (4 mol Alliter) passes through a mixed flow 
reactor followed by a plug flow reactor. Find the concentration at the exit 
of the plug flow reactor if in the mixed flow reactor C, = 1 mollliter. The 
reaction is second-order with respect to A, and the volume of the plug 
flow unit is three times that of the mixed flow unit. 
6.4. Reactant A (A -t R, C, 
= 26 mol/m3) passes in steady flow through four 
equal-size mixed flow reactors in series (T,,,,, = 2 min). When steady state 
is achieved the concentration of A is found to be 11, 5, 2, 1 mol/m3 in the 
four units. For this reaction, what must be rplUg 
SO as to reduce C, from 
C, 
= 26 to CAf = 1 mol/m3? 
6.5. Originally we had planned to lower the activity of a gas stream containing 
radioactive Xe-138 (half-life = 14 min) by having it pass through two 
holdup tanks in series, both well mixed and of such size that the mean 
residence time of gas is 2 weeks in each tank. It has been suggested that 
we replace the two tanks with a long tube (assume plug flow). What must 
be the size of this tube compared to the two original stirred tanks, and 


=== PDF PAGE 164 ===
148 
Chapter 6 Design ,for Single Reactions 
what should be the mean residence time of gas in this tube for the same 
extent of radioactive decay? 
6.6. At 100°C pure gaseous A reacts away with stoichiometry 2A + R + S in 
a constant volume batch reactor as follows: 
t, sec 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
p,,atm 
1 
1.00 
0.96 
0.80 
0.56 
0.32 
0.18 
0.08 
0.04 
0.02 
What size of plug flow reactor operating at 100°C and 1 atm can treat 100 
moles Alhr in a feed consisting of 20% inerts to obtain 95% conversion of A? 
6.7. We wish to treat 10 literstmin of liquid feed containing 1 mol Alliter to 
99% conversion. The stoichiometry and kinetics of the reaction are given 
by 
C A 
mot 
A+R, 
- r A =  0.2 + C, 
liter. min 
Suggest a good arrangement for doing this using two mixed flow reactors, 
and find the size of the two units needed. Sketch the final design chosen. 
6.8. From steady-state kinetics runs in a mixed flow reactor, we obtain the 
following data on the reaction A + R. 
- - 
-- 
- 
-- 
- 
7, sec 
C,,, 
mmollliter 
C, 
mmollliter 
60 
50 
20 
35 
100 
40 
11 
100 
60 
20 
200 
80 
11 
200 
100 
Find the space time needed to treat a feed of C,, 
= 100 mmollliter to 
80% conversion 
(a) in a plug flow reactor. 
(b) in a mixed flow reactor. 
6.9. At present we have 90% conversion of a liquid feed (n = 1, C,, 
= 10 moll 
liter) to our plug flow reactor with recycle of product (R = 2). If we shut 
off the recycle stream, by how much will this lower the processing rate of 
our feed to the same 90% conversion? 
6.10. Aqueous feed containing reactant A (C,, 
= 2 mol/liter) enters a plug flow 
reactor (10 liter) which has a provision for recycling a portion of the flowing 
stream. The reaction kinetics and stoichiometry are 
mol 
A-tR, 
- r A = l C  C liter emin 


=== PDF PAGE 165 ===
Problems 149 
and we wish to get 96% conversion. Should we use the recycle stream? If 
so, at what value should we set the recycle flow rate so as to obtain the 
highest production rate, and what volumetric feed rate can we process to 
this conversion in the reactor? 
6.11. Consider the autocatalytic reaction A --+ R, with -rA = 0.001 CACR moll 
1iter.s. We wish to process 1.5 litersls of a CAo = 10 mollliter feed to the 
highest conversion possible in the reactor system consisting of four 100- 
liter mixed flow reactors connected as you wish and any feed arrangement. 
Sketch your recommended design and feed arrangement and determine 
CAf from this system. 
6.12. A first-order liquid-phase reaction, 92% conversion, is taking place in a 
mixed flow reactor. It has been suggested that a fraction of the product 
stream, with no additional treatment, be recycled. If the feed rate remains 
unchanged, in what way would this affect conversion? 
6.13. 100 literslhr of radioactive fluid having a half-life of 20 hr is to be treated 
by passing it through two ideal stirred tanks in series, V = 40 000 liters 
each. In passing through this system, how much will the activity decay? 
6.14. At present the elementary liquid-phase reaction A + B + R + S takes 
place in a plug flow reactor using equimolar quantities of A and B. Conver- 
sion is 96%, C,, 
= C,, = 1 mollliter. If a mixed flow reactor ten times as 
large as the plug flow reactor were hooked up in series with the existing 
unit, which unit should come first and by what fraction could production 
be increased for that setup? 
.IS. The kinetics of the aqueous-phase decomposition of A is investigated in 
two mixed flow reactors in series, the second having twice the volume of 
the first reactor. At steady state with a feed concentration of 1 mol Alliter 
and mean residence time of 96 sec in the first reactor, the concentration 
in the first reactor is 0.5 rnol Alliter and in the second is 0.25 rnol Alliter. 
Find the kinetic equation for the decomposition. 
6.16. Using a color indicator which shows when the concentration of A falls 
below 0.1 mollliter, the following scheme is devised to explore the kinetics 
of the decomposition of A. A feed of 0.6 mol Alliter is introduced into 
the first of the two mixed flow reactors in series, each having a volume of 
400 cm3. The color change occurs in the first reactor for a steady-state feed 
rate of 10 cmymin, and in the second reactor for a steady-state feed rate 
of 50 cm3/min. Find the rate equation for the decomposition of A from 
this information. 
6.17. The elementary irreversible aqueous-phase reaction A + B -, R + S is 
carried out isothermally as follows. Equal volumetric flow rates of two 
liquid streams are introduced into a 4-liter mixing tank. One stream contains 
0.020 mol Alliter, the other 1.400 rnol Blliter. The mixed stream is then 


=== PDF PAGE 166 ===
150 
Chapter 6 Design for Single Reactions 
passed through a 16-liter plug flow reactor. We find that some R is formed 
in the mixing tank, its concentration being 0.002 mollliter. Assuming that 
the mixing tank acts as a mixed flow reactor, find the concentration of R 
at the exit of the plug flow reactor as well as the fraction of initial A that 
has been converted in the system. 
6.18. At present conversion is 213 for our elementary second-order liquid reaction 
2A i. 2R when operating in an isothermal plug flow reactor with a recycle 
ratio of unity. What will be the conversion if the recycle stream is shut off? 
6.19. We wish to explore various reactor setups for the transformation of A into 
R. The feed contains 99% A, 1% R; the desired product is to consist of 
10% A, 90% R. The transformation takes place by means of the elementary 
reaction 
with rate constant k = 1 literlmol . min. The concentration of active materi- 
als is 
throughout. 
What reactor holding time will yield a product in which C, = 0.9 moll 
liter (a) in a plug flow reactor, (b) in a mixed flow reactor, and (c) in a 
minimum-size setup without recycle? 
6.20. Reactant A decomposes with stoichiometry A-R 
and with rate dependent 
only on C,. The following data on this aqueous decomposition are obtained 
in a mixed flow reactor: 
T, sec 
c ~ o  
c A 
14 
200 
100 
25 
190 
90 
29 
180 
80 
30 
170 
70 
29 
160 
60 
27 
150 
50 
24 
140 
40 
19 
130 
30 
15 
120 
20 
12 
110 
10 
20 
101 
1 
Determine which setup, plug flow, mixed flow, or any two-reactor combina- 
tion gives minimum T for 90% conversion of a feed consisting of C,, 
= 
100. Also find this T minimum. If a two-reactor scheme is found to be 
optimum, give C, between stages and T for each stage. 


=== PDF PAGE 167 ===
Problems 151 
6.21. For an irreversible first-order liquid-phase reaction (CAO = 10 mollliter) 
conversion is 90% in a plug flow reactor. If two-thirds of the stream leaving 
the reactor is recycled to the reactor entrance, and if the throughput to 
the whole reactor-recycle system is kept unchanged, what does this do to 
the concentration of reactant leaving the system? 
6.22. At room temperature the second-order irreversible liquid-phase reaction 
proceeds as follows: 
A batch reactor takes 18 min to fill and empty. What percent conversion 
and reaction time should we use so as to maximize the daily output of 
product R? 


=== PDF PAGE 168 ===
Chapter 7 
Design for Parallel Reactions 
Introduction to Multiple Reactions 
The preceding chapter on single reactions showed that the performance (size) 
of a reactor was influenced by the pattern of flow within the vessel. In this and 
the next chapter, we extend the discussion to multiple reactions and show that 
for these, both the size requirement and the distribution of reaction products 
are affected by the pattern of flow within the vessel. We may recall at this point 
that the distinction between a single reaction and multiple reactions is that the 
single reaction requires only one rate expression to describe its kinetic behavior 
whereas multiple reactions require more than one rate expression. 
Since multiple reactions are so varied in type and seem to have so little 
in common, we may despair of finding general guiding principles for design. 
Fortunately, this is not so because many multiple reactions can be considered 
to be combinations of two primary types: parallel reactions and series 
reactions. 
In this chapter we treat parallel reactions. In the next chapter we treat series 
reactions as well as all sorts of series-parallel combinations. 
Let us consider the general approach and nomenclature. First of all, we find 
it more convenient to deal with concentrations rather than conversions. Second, 
in examining product distribution the procedure is to eliminate the time variable 
by dividing one rate equation by another. We end up then with equations relating 
the rates of change of certain components with respect to other components of 
the systems. Such relationships are relatively easy to treat. Thus, we use two 
distinct analyses, one for determination of reactor size and the other for the 
study of product distribution. 
The two requirements, small reactor size and maximization of desired product, 
may run counter to each other. In such a situation an economic analysis will 
yield the best compromise. In general, however, product distribution controls; 
consequently, this chapter concerns primarily optimization with respect to prod- 
uct distribution, a factor which plays no role in single reactions. 
Finally, we ignore expansion effects in this chapter; thus, we take E = 0 
throughout. This means that we may use the terms mean residence time, reactor 
holding time, space time, and reciprocal space velocity interchangeably. 


=== PDF PAGE 169 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 153 
Qualitative Discussion About Product Distribution. Consider the decomposi- 
tion of A by either one of two paths: 
R 
(desired product) 
k'f 
(la) 
S 
(unwanted product) 
with corresponding rate equations 
Dividing Eq. 2a by Eq. 2b gives a measure of the relative rates of formation of 
R and S. Thus 
and we wish this ratio to be as large as possible. 
Now C, is the only factor in this equation which we can adjust and control 
(k,, k,, a,, and a, are all constant for a specific system at a given temperature) 
and we can keep C, low throughout the reactor by any of the following means: 
by using a mixed flow reactor, maintaining high conversions, increasing inerts 
in the feed, or decreasing the pressure in gas-phase systems. On the other hand, 
we can keep CA high by using a batch or plug flow reactor, maintaining low 
conversions, removing inerts from the feed, or increasing the pressure in gas- 
phase systems. 
For the reactions of Eq. 1 let us see whether the concentration of A should 
be kept high or low. 
If a, > a,, or the desired reaction is of higher order than the unwanted reaction, 
Eq. 3 shows that a high reactant concentration is desirable since it increases the 
RIS ratio. As a result, a batch or plug flow reactor would favor formation of 
product R and would require a minimum reactor size. 
If a, < a,, or the desired reaction is of lower order than the unwanted reaction, 
we need a low reactant concentration to favor formation of R. But this would 
also require large mixed flow reactor. 
If a, = a,, or the two reactions are of the same order, Eq. 3 becomes 
Y~ - dCR - k1 - constant 
Ys 
dCs 
k, 
Hence, product distribution is fixed by k,lk, alone and is unaffected by type of 
reactor used. 


=== PDF PAGE 170 ===
154 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
We also may control product distribution by varying k21k,. This can be done 
in two ways: 
1. By changing the temperature level of operation. If the activation energies 
of the two reactions are different, k,lk2 can be made to vary. Chapter 9 
considers this problem. 
2. By using a catalyst. One of the most important features of a catalyst is its 
selectivity in depressing or accelerating specific reactions. This may be a 
much more effective way of controlling product distribution than any of 
the methods discussed so far. 
We summarize our qualitative findings as follows: 
For reactions in parallel, the concentration level of reactants is 
the key to proper control ofproduct distribution. A high 
reactant concentration favors the reaction of higher order, a 
low concentration favors the reaction of lower order, while the 
concentration level has no effect on the product distribution for 
reactions of the same order. 
When you have two or more reactants, combinations of high and low reactant 
concentrations can be obtained by controlling the concentration of feed materials, 
by having certain components in excess, and by using the correct contacting 
pattern of reacting fluids. Figures 7.1 and 7.2 illustrate methods of contacting 
two reacting fluids in continuous and noncontinuous operations that keep the 
concentrations of these components both high, both low, or one high and the 
other low. In general, the number of reacting fluids involved, the possibility of 
recycle, and the cost of possible alternative setups must all be considered before 
the most desirable contacting pattern can be achieved. 
In any case, the use of the proper contacting pattern is the critical factor in 
obtaining a favorable distribution of products for multiple reactions. 
CAP CB both high 
m 
CA high, CB low n 
Add A and B \  
all at one time 
Add A and B 1 
Start with A, 1 
slowly; level rises 
add B slowly 
Figure 7.1 Contacting patterns for various combinations of high and low concentration 
of reactants in noncontinuous operations. 


=== PDF PAGE 171 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 155 
Figure 7.2 Contacting patterns for various combinations of high and low concentration 
of reactants in continuous flow operations. 
CONTACTING PATTERNS FOR REACTIONS IN PARALLEL 
The desired liquid-phase reaction 
is accompanied by the unwanted side reaction 
From the standpoint of favorable product distribution, order the contacting 
schemes of Fig. 7.2, from the most desirable to the least desirable. 
SOLUTION 
Dividing Eq. (5) by Eq. (6) gives the ratio 
which is to be kept as large as possible. According to the rule for reactions in 
parallel, we want to keep CA high, CB low, and since the concentration depen- 
dency of B is more pronounced than of A, it is more important to have low CB 
than high CA. The contacting schemes are therefore ordered as shown in Fig. E7.1. 


=== PDF PAGE 172 ===
156 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
Most 
- 
Least 
desirable 
desirable 
CA high 
CA low 
CA high 
CB low 
CB low 
CB high 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
C, 
low 
CB high 
(4 
Figure E7.1 
Comment. Example 7.2 verifies these qualitative findings. We should also note 
that there are still other contacting schemes which are superior to the best found 
in this example. For example, if we can use an excess of a reactant, or if it is 
practical to separate and recycle unconverted reactant, then vastly improved 
hroduct distribution is possible. 
Quantitative Treatment of Product Distribution and of Reactor Size. If rate 
equations are known for the individual reactions, we can quantitatively determine 
product distribution and reactor-size requirements. For convenience in evaluating 
product distribution we introduce two terms, p and a. First, consider the decom- 
position of reactant A, and let cp be the fraction of A disappearing at any instant 
which is transformed into desired product R. We call this the instantaneous 
fractional yield of R. Thus at any CA 
.=( moles Rformed - dCR 
moles A reacted I-- -dCA 
For any particular set of reactions and rate equations cp is a function of CA, 
and since CA in general varies through the reactor, p will also change with 
position in the reactor. So let us define @ as the fraction of all the reacted A 
that has been converted into R, and let us call this the overall fractional yield 
of R. The overall fractional yield is then the mean of the instantaneous fractional 
yields at all points within the reactor; thus we may write 
all R formed - 
@ = 
C ~ f  - - 
C
~
f
 = 
- 
(all A reacted) - CAo - CAf (-ACA) 
.in 
reactor 
It is the overall fractional yield that really concerns us for it represents the 
product distribution at the reactor outlet. Now the proper averaging for cp depends 


=== PDF PAGE 173 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 157 
on the type of flow within the reactor. Thus for plug flow, 
where C, changes 
progressively through the reactor, we have from Eq. 7: 
- 1 
For PFR: 
@, 
= 
1 
I" pdC, = - 
jcAf 
qdC, 
CAO - CAf CAO 
4C.A c*, 
For mixed flow, 
the composition is C, everywhere, so cp is likewise constant 
throughout the reactor, and we have 
The over-all fractional yields from mixed and plug flow reactors processing A 
from C, to CAf are related by 
a,,, = (2) 
at 
and 
QP 
= - 
I" @,dCA 
AC, 
c, 
These expressions allow us to predict the yields from one type of reactor given 
the yields from the other. 
For a series of 1, 2, . . . , N mixed flow reactors in which the concentration of 
A is CAI, C,,, 
. . . , C, 
the overall fractional yield is obtained by summing the 
fractional yields in each of the N vessels and weighting these values by the 
amount of reaction occurring in each vessel. Thus 
from which 
(~l(C,o - CAI) + ~ C A I  
- CA,) + ... + (PN(~A,N-I 
- CAN) 
@N mixed = 
c,, - CM 
(12) 
For any reactor type the exit concentration of R is obtained directly from Eq. 
8. Thus 
and Fig. 7.3 shows how C, is found for different types of reactors. For mixed 
flow reactors, or mixed flow reactors in series, the best outlet concentration to 
use, that which maximizes C,, may have to be found by maximization of rectangles 
(see Chapter 6). 
Now the shape of the cp versus C, curve determines which type of flow gives 
the best product distribution, and Fig. 7.4 shows typical shapes of these curves 
for which plug flow, mixed flow, and mixed followed by plug flow are best. 
These fractional yield expressions allow us to relate the product distribution 
from different types of reactors and to search for the best contacting scheme. 
However, one condition must be satisfied before we can safely use these relation- 
ships: We must truly have parallel reactions in which no product influences the 


=== PDF PAGE 174 ===
158 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
Plug flow I 
CRffrom 
CRfflOrn 
4 
Eqs. 13 and 9 
1 
4 
Eqs. 13 and 10 
! 
1 Staged reactors I 
CRf from 
Eqs. 13 and 12 
Figure 7.3 Shaded and dashed area gives total R formed. 
rate to change the product distribution. The easiest way to test this is to add 
products to the feed and verify that the product distribution is in no way altered. 
So far, the fractional yield of R has been taken as a function of C, 
alone and 
has been defined on the basis of the amount of this component consumed. More 
generally, when there are two or more reactants involved, the fractional yield 
can be based on one of the reactants consumed, on all reactants consumed, or 
on products formed. It is simply a matter of convenience which definition is 
used. Thus, in general, we define p(M/N) as the instantaneous fractional yield 
of M, based on the disappearance or formation of N. 
The use of fractional yields to determine the product distribution for parallel 
reactions was developed by Denbigh (1944, 1961). 
The Selectivity. Another term, the selectivity, is often used in place of fractional 
yield. It is usually defined as follows: 
moles of desired product formed 
selectivity = moles of undesired material formed 
Figure 7.4 The contacting pattern with the largest area produces most R: (a) plug flow 
is best, (b) mixed flow is best, (c) mixed flow up to CAI followed by plug flow is best. 


=== PDF PAGE 175 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 159 
This definition may lead to difficulties. For example, if the reaction is the partial 
oxidation of a hydrocarbon, as follows: 
a goulash of undesired 
to2 
A (reactant) - 
R (desired) + materials (CO, CO,, H20, 
CH,OH, etc. 
Here the selectivity is hard to evaluate, and not very useful. Thus, we stay away 
from selectivity and use the clearly defined and useful fractional yield, p(R/A). 
f l p i  ' 'I I I 
PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION FOR PARALLEL REACTIONS 
Consider the aqueous reactions 
R, desired 
~ C R  
- 
= 1.0 C: Ci3, mol/liter.min 
k ' f  
dt 
For 90% conversion of A find the concentration of R in the product stream. 
Equal volumetric flow rates of the A and of B streams are fed to the reactor, 
and each stream has a concentration of 20 mollliter of reactant. 
The flow in the reactor follows. 
(a) Plug flow 
(b) Mixed flow 
(c) The best of the four plug-mixed contacting schemes of Example 7.1. 
As a warning, be careful to get the concentrations right when you mix streams. 
We show this in the three sketches for this problem. Also, the instantaneous 
fractional yield of the desired compound is 
Now let us proceed. 
(a) Plug Flow 
Referring to Fig. E7.2a, noting that the starting concentration of each reactant 
in the combined feed is CAO = C,, = 10 mollliter and that CA = CB everywhere, 
we find from Eq. 9 that 


=== PDF PAGE 176 ===
160 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
In separate streams 
cAf = cBf = 1 
ego = 20 
C R , ~  
+ C~ f = 
Figure E7.2a 
Let C y  = x, then C, = x2 and dC, = 2xdx. Replacing C, by x in the above 
expression gives 
(b) Mixed Flow 
Referring to Fig. E7.2b, we have from Eq. 10, for C, = CB 
Therefore Eq. 13 gives 
5x2: I CA0 = c,, = 10 
-J Cb, = 20 
Figure E7.2b 
(c) Plug Flow A-Mixed Flow B 
Assuming that B is introduced into the reactor in such a way that CB = 1 moll 
liter throughout, we find concentrations as shown in Fig. E7.2~. Then accounting 
cg, = 20 
f f f ) 
~ s s u r n e  C,= 
1 everywhere 
I 
Figure E7.2~ 


=== PDF PAGE 177 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 161 
I 
for the changing C, in the reactor, we find 
- 1 
-1 
1 
CAdCA 
JCAf 'pic* = - 
j 
@ (:I 
= CA" - c ~ f  
'A" 
19 - 1 19 CA f (I)'.' 
Therefore 
For plug flow: @ 
= 0.32 and CRf = 2.86 mollliter 
For mixed flow: @ 
= 0.50 and CRf = 4.5 mollliter 
For the optimum: 
@ 
= 0.87 and CRf = 7.85 mollliter 
Note. These results verify the qualitative findings of Example 7.1. 
The Side Entry Reactor 
To evaluate how best to distribute the side entry feed and how to calculate the 
corresponding conversion equation is a rather complex problem. For this type 
of contacting in general see Westerterp et al. (1984). 
To actually build a commercial-sized side entry reactor is another problem. 
Chem. Eng. News (1997) reports on how this was cleverly done by using a reactor 
somewhat like a shell-and-tube heat exchanger which used porous walled tubes. 
Reactant A flowed through the tubes which contained baffles to encourage 
lateral mixing of fluid and approach to plug flow. Reactant B, to be kept at a 
close-to-constant low concentration in the tubes, enters the exchanger through 
the shell side at a somewhat higher pressure than that in the tubes. Thus, B 
diffused into the tubes along the whole length of the tubes. 
GOOD OPERATING CONDITIONS FOR PARALLEL 
REACTIONS 
Often a desired reaction is accompanied by a variety of undesired side reactions, 
some of higher order, some of lower order. To see which type of single reactor 
gives the best product distribution, consider the simplest typical case, the parallel 


=== PDF PAGE 178 ===
162 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
decompositions of A, C,, = 2, 
Find the maximum expected C, for isothermal operations 
(a) in a mixed flow reactor 
(b) in a plug flow reactor 
(c) in a reactor of your choice if unreacted A can be separated from the 
product stream and returned to the feed at CAo = 2. 
SOLUTION 
Since S is the desired product, let us write fractional yields in terms of S. Thus 
Plotting this function we find the curve of Fig. E7.3 whose maximum occurs where 
CA 
(a) 
Figure E7.3a, b, c 
I 
Solving we find 
(a) Mixed Reactor. Most S is formed when the rectangle under the cp versus 
CA curve has the largest area. The required conditions can be found either 
by graphical maximization of rectangles or analytically. Since simple explicit 
expressions are available in this problem, let us use the latter approach. Then 
from Eqs. 10 and 13 we find for the area of the rectangle 


=== PDF PAGE 179 ===
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 163 
Differentiating and setting to zero to find the conditions at which most S 
is formed 
Evaluating this quantity gives the optimum operating conditions of a mixed 
reactor as 
(b) Plug Flow Reactor. The production of S is maximum when the area under 
the q versus C, curve is maximum. This occurs at 100% conversion of A, as seen 
in Fig. E7.3b. Thus, from Eqs. 9 and 13 
Evaluating this integral gives, for the plug flow optimum, 
(c) Any Reactor with Separation and Recycle of Unused Reactant. Since no 
reactant leaves the system unconverted, what is important is to operate at condi- 
tions of highest fractional yield. This is at CA = 1, where cp (SIA) = 0.5, as shown 
in Fig. E7.3~. Thus, we should use a mixed flow reactor operating at CA = 1. 
We would then have 50% of reactant A forming product S. 
Comment. Summarizing, we find 
moles S formed = 0.33 for MFR 
moles A fed 
= 0.43 for a PFR 
= 0.50 for an MFR with separation and recycle 
Thus, a mixed flow reactor operating at conditions of highest cp with separation 
and recycle of unused reactant gives the best product distribution. This result is 
quite general for a set of parallel reactions of different order. 
#
$
 
BEST OPERATING CONDITIONS FOR PARALLEL 
.I:, 
i 
,
,
,
.
l
l
l
i
l
 REACTIONS 
For the reaction of Example 7.3 determine the arrangement of reactors which 
would produce most S in a flow system where recycle and reconcentration of 
unreacted feed is not possible. Find C,,t,,t,, for this arrangement of reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 180 ===
164 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
From Fig. E7.4 we see that mixed flow followed by plug flow would be best. 
Mixed 
/- flow 
c A 
Figure E7.4 
Thus, for mixed flow, from Example 7.3 
C, = 1, p = 0.5, thus C, = p(ACA) = 0.5(2 - 1) = 0.5 mollliter 
For plug flow, from Example 7.3 
1 
2 c ,  
cs = - /: pdc, = /,, (1 + c,)~ 
dC, = 0.386 mollliter 
Therefore, the total amount of C, formed is 
This is only slightly better than for plug flow alone, calculated in Example 7.3. 
REFERENCES 
Chem. and Eng. News, 51, April 7, 1997. 
Denbigh, K. G., Trans. Faraday Soc., 40, 352 (1944). 
Denbigh, K. G., Chem. Eng. Sci., 14, 25 (1961). 
Westerterp, K. R., van Swaaij, W. P. M., and Beenackers, A. A. C. M., Chemical Reactor 
Design and Operation, Wiley, New York, 1984. 
PROBLEMS 
7.1. For a given feed stream having C,, should we use a PFR or a MFR and 
should we use a high or low or some intermediate conversion level for the 


=== PDF PAGE 181 ===
Problems 165 
exit stream if we wish to maximize (p(SIA)? The reaction system is 
R 
1.;" 
A -+ S, desired 
S 
where n,, n,, and n, are the reaction orders of reactions 1, 2, and 3. 
(a) n, = 1, n, = 2, n, = 3 
(b) n, = 2, n, = 3, n3 = 1 
(c) n1 = 3, n, = 1, n3 = 2 
Using separate feeds of A and B sketch the contacting pattern and reactor 
conditions which would best promote the formation of product R for the 
following systems of elementary reactions. 
A + B + R  
7.2. 
A + + R} HOW system 
A+S 
2B + T 
7.4. A + tR} Batch system 
7.5. 
A + S  
A + + R} Flow system 
2A+S 
7.6. Substance A in a liquid reacts to produce R and S as follows: 
R 
first order 
A f 
\i 
S 
first order 
A feed (CAo = 1, C,, = 0, C,, = 0) enters two mixed flow reactors in 
series, (7, = 2.5 min, 7, = 5 min). Knowing the composition in the first 
reactor (CAI = 0.4, CRl = 0.4, CSl = 0.2), find the composition leaving the 
second reactor. 
7.7. Substance A in the liquid phase produces R and S by the following reactions: 
The feed (CAo = 1.0, CRo = 0, Cso = 0.3) enters two mixed flow reactors 
in series ( 7 1  = 2.5 min, 7, = 10 min). Knowing the composition in the first 
reactor (CAI = 0.4, CRl = 0.2, C,, = 0.7), find the composition leaving the 
second reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 182 ===
166 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
Liquid reactant A decomposes as follows: 
A feed of aqueous A (C,, 
= 40 mol/m3) enters a reactor, decomposes, and 
a mixture of A, R, and S leaves. 
7.8. Find C,, and C, and r for X, = 0.9 in a mixed flow reactor. 
7.9. Find C,, and C, and r for X, = 0.9 in a plug flow reactor. 
7.10. Find the operating condition (X,, 
7; and C,) which maximizes Cs in a 
mixed flow reactor. 
7.11. Find the operating condition (X,, r, and C,) which maximizes C, in a 
mixed flow reactor. 
7.12. Reactant A in a liquid either isomerizes or dimerizes as follows: 
(a) Write P(RIA) and (p[RI(R + S)]. 
With a feed stream of concentration C, find C,,,,, 
which can be formed 
(b) in a plug flow reactor, 
(c) in a mixed flow reactor. 
A quantity of A of initial concentration C, 
= 1 mollliter is dumped into 
a batch reactor and is reacted to completion. 
(d) If C, = 0.18 mollliter in the resultant mixture, what does this tell of 
the kinetics of the reaction? 
7.13. In a reactive environment, chemical A decomposes as follows 
For a feed stream C, 
= 4 mollliter what size ratio of two mixed flow 
reactors will maximize the production rate of R? Also give the composition 
of A and R leaving these two reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 183 ===
Problems 167 
Consider the parallel decomposition of A of different orders 
Determine the maximum concentration of desired product obtainable in 
(a) plug flow, 
(b) mixed flow. 
7.14, R is the desired product and CAo = 2. 
7.15, S is the desired product and CAo = 4. 
7.16, T is the desired product and CAo = 5. 
Under ultraviolet radiation, reactant A of CA, = 10 kmol/m3 in a process 
stream (v = lm3/min) decomposes as follows. 
rR3 
r, = 16~:' 
kmol/m3.min 
A- 
S, 
rS = 12CA kmol/m3.min 
I 
T, 
r, = C; 
kmollm3.min 
We wish to design a reactor setup for a specific duty. Sketch the scheme 
selected, and calculate the fraction of feed transformed into desired product 
as well as the volume of reactor needed. 
7.17. Product R is the desired material. 
7.18, Product S is the desired material. 
7.19, Product T is the desired material, 
The stoichiometry of a liquid-phase decomposition is known to be 
In a series of steady-state flow experiments (CAo = 100, CRO = CSO = 0) in 
a laboratory mixed flow reactor the following results are obtained: 
Further experiments indicate that the level of C, and Cs have no effect 
on the progress of the reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 184 ===
168 
Chapter 7 Design for Parallel Reactions 
7.20. With a feed C, 
= 100 and exit concentration CAf = 20, find CR at the exit 
from a plug flow reactor. 
7.21. With C, 
= 200 and CAf = 20, find C, at the exit from a mixed flow reactor. 
7.22. How should we operate a mixed flow reactor so as to maximize the produc- 
tion of R? Separation and recycle of unused reactant is not practical. 
When aqueous A and aqueous B (C,, 
= CBo) are brought together they 
react in two possible ways: 
mol 
R +T. 
r, = 5 0 C ~  - 
f 
m3.hr 
1 
mol 
S + U, 
rs = l0OCB - 
m3.hr 
to give a mixture whose concentration of active components (A, B, R, S, 
T, U) is C,,,,, = C, + CB, = 60 mol/m3. Find the size of reactor needed 
and the R/S ratio produced for 90% conversion of an equimolar feed of 
FA, = FBo = 300 mollhr: 
7.23. in a mixed flow reactor; 
7.24. in a plug flow reactor; 
7.25. in a reactor that gives highest CR. Chapter 6 tells that this should be plug 
flow for A and side entry for B. In such a reactor introduce B in such a 
way that CB is constant throughout the reactor. 
7.26. Reactant A decomposes in an isothermal batch reactor (CAo = 100 ) to 
produce wanted R and unwanted S, and the following progressive concen- 
tration readings are recorded: 
Additional runs show that adding R or S does not affect the distribution 
of products formed and that only A does. Also, it is noted that the total 
number of moles of A, R, and S is constant. 
(a) Find the cp versus C, curve for this reaction. 
With a feed of CAo = 100 and CAf = 10, find C, 
(b) from a mixed flow reactor, 
(c) from a plug flow reactor, 
(d) and (e): Repeat parts (b) and (c) with the modification that CAo = 70. 
7.27. The great naval battle, to be known to history as the Battle of Trafalgar 
(1805), was soon to be joined. Admiral Villeneuve proudly surveyed his 
powerful fleet of 33 ships stately sailing in single file in the light breeze. 


=== PDF PAGE 185 ===
Problems 169 
The British fleet under Lord Nelson was now in sight, 27 ships strong. 
Estimating that it would still be 2 hours before battle, Villeneuve popped 
open another bottle of burgundy and point by point reviewed his carefully 
thought-out battle strategy. As was the custom of naval battles at that time, 
the two fleets would sail in single file parallel to each other and in the same 
direction, firing their cannons madly. Now, by long experience in battles 
of this kind, it was a well-known fact that the rate of destruction of a fleet 
is proportional to the fire power of the opposing fleet. Considering his 
ships to be on a par, one for one, with the British, Villeneuve was confident 
of victory. Looking at his sundial, Villeneuve sighed and cursed the light 
wind-he'd 
never get it over with in time for his afternoon snooze. "Oh 
well," he sighed, "c'est la vie." He could see the headlines next morning: 
"British fleet annihilated, Villeneuve's losses are . . ." Villeneuve stopped 
short. How many ships would he lose? Villeneuve called over his chief 
bottle-cork popper, Monsieur Dubois, and asked this question. What an- 
swer does he get? 
At this very moment, Nelson, who was enjoying the air on the poop 
deck of the Victory, was stuck with the realization that all was ready except 
for one detail-he 
had forgotten to formulate his battle plan. Commodore 
Archibald Forsythe-Smythe, his trusty trusty, was hurriedly called over for 
a conference. Being familiar with the firepower law, Nelson was loathe to 
fight the whole French fleet (he could see the headlines too). Now certainly 
it was no disgrace for Nelson to be defeated in battle by superior forces, 
so long as he did his best and played the game; however, he had a sneaking 
suspicion that maybe he could pull a fast one. With a nagging conscience as 
to whether it was cricket or not, he proceeded to investigate this possibility. 
It was possible to "break the line3'-that is, to start parallel to the French 
fleet, and then cut in and divide the enemy fleet into two sections. The 
rear section could be engaged and disposed of before the front section 
could turn around and rejoin the fray. Now to the question. Should he 
split the French fleet and if so, then where? Commodore Forsythe-Smythe, 
who was so rudely taken from his grog, grumpily agreed to consider this 
question and to advise Nelson at what point to split the French fleet so as 
to maximize their chance for success. He also agreed to predict the outcome 
of the battle using this strategy. What did he come up with? 
7.28 Find the size of the two reactors needed in Example 7.4 (see Figure E7.4) 
for a feed flow rate of 100 literls, and for reaction rates given in units of 
mollliter. s. 


=== PDF PAGE 186 ===
Chapter 8 
Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Chapter 7 considered reactions in parallel. These are reactions where the product 
does not react further. This chapter considers all sorts of reactions where the 
product formed may react further. Here are some examples: 
Series 
AZR-S 
Reversible and 
irreversible 
Series parallel, or 
consecutive-competitive 
Reversible 
A-R-S 
\ 1 \ 1  
T 
U 
Denbigh system 
Reversible 
network 
We develop or present the performance equations of some of the simpler systems 
and point out their special features such as maxima of intermediates. 
8.1 IRREVERSIBLE FIRST-ORDER REACTIONS IN SERIES 
For easy visualization consider that the reactions 
proceed only in the presence of light, that they stop the instant the light is turned 
off, and that for a given intensity of radiation, the rate equations are 
Our discussion centers about these reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 187 ===
8.1 
Irreversible First-Order Reactions in Series 171 
Time since light was turned on 
Figure 8.1 Concentration-time curves if 
the contents of the beaker are irradi- 
ated uniformly. 
Qualitative Discussion About Product Distribution. Consider the following two 
ways of treating a beaker containing A: First, the contents are uniformly irradi- 
ated; second, a small stream is continuously withdrawn from the beaker, irradi- 
ated, and returned to the beaker; the rate of absorption of radiant energy is the 
same in the two cases. The two schemes are shown in Figs. 8.1 and 8.2. During 
this process A disappears and products are formed. Is the product distribution 
of R and S different in the two beakers? Let us see whether we can answer this 
question qualitatively for all values of the rate constants. 
In the first beaker, when the contents are being irradiated all at the same time, 
the first bit of light will attack A alone because only A is present at the start. 
The result is that R is formed. With the next bit of light both A and R will 
compete; however, A is in very large excess so it will preferentially absorb the 
radiant energy to decompose and form more R. Thus, the concentration of R 
will rise while the concentration of A will fall. This process will continue until 
R is present in high enough concentration so that it can compete favorably with 
A for the radiant energy. When this happens, a maximum R concentration is 
reached. After this the decomposition of R becomes more rapid than its rate of 
Essentially 
A-R-S 
b 
Y 
m 
a 
C 
.- 
C 
.- 
C1 E - 
al 
C 
8 
Time since light was turned on 
Figure 8.2 Concentration-time curves for the contents of the beaker if 
only a small portion of the fluid is irradiated at any instant. 


=== PDF PAGE 188 ===
172 Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
formation and its concentration drops. A typical concentration time curve is 
shown in Fig. 8.1. 
In the alternative way of treating A, a small fraction of the beaker's contents 
is continuously removed, irradiated, and returned to the beaker. Although the 
total absorption rate is the same in the two cases, the intensity of radiation 
received by the removed fluid is greater, and it could well be, if the flow rate is 
not too high, that the fluid being irradiated reacts essentially to completion. In 
this case, then, A is removed and S is returned to the beaker. So, as time passes 
the concentration of A slowly decreases in the beaker, S rises, while R is absent. 
This progressive change is shown in Fig. 8.2. 
These two methods of reacting the contents of the beaker yield different 
product distributions and represent the two extremes in possible operations, one 
with a maximum possible formation of R and the other with a minimum, or no 
formation, of R. How can we best characterize this behavior? We note in the 
first method that the contents of the beaker remain homogeneous throughout, 
all changing slowly with time, whereas in the second a stream of highly reacted 
fluid is continually being mixed with fresh fluid. In other words, we are mixing 
two streams of different compositions. This discussion suggests the following 
rule governing product distribution for reactions in series. 
For irreversible reactions in series the mixing of fluid of 
different composition is the key to the formation of 
intermediate. The maximum possible amount of any and all 
intermediates is obtained if fluids of different compositions 
and at different stages of conversion are not allowed to mix. 
1
As the intermediate is frequently the desired reaction product, this rule allows 
us to evaluate the effectiveness of various reactor systems. For example, plug 
flow and batch operations should both give a maximum R yield because here 
there is no mixing of fluid streams of different compositions. On the other hand, 
the mixed reactor should not give as high a yield of R as possible because a 
fresh stream of pure A is being mixed continually with an already reacted fluid 
in the reactor. 
The following examples illustrate the point just made. We then give a quantita- 
tive treatment which will verify these qualitative findings. 
FAVORABLE CONTACTING PATTERNS FOR ANY SET 
OF IRREVERSIBLE REACTIONS IN SERIES, NOT JUST 
A + R - S  
Which contacting pattern of Figs. E8.1, when properly operated, can give a higher 
concentration of any intermediate, the contacting pattern on the left or the one 
on the right? 


=== PDF PAGE 189 ===
8.1 Irreversible First-Order Reactions in Series 173 
(dl 
Figure ES.la, b, c, d 
I SOLUTION 
Focusing on the mixing rule for reactions in series, that the extent of mixing of 
streams of different composition should be minimized, we reason 
for part (a): 
The left pattern is better; in fact it is the best possible flow 
scheme. 
for part (b): 
Looking at Figs. 6.5,6.6, and 6.16,6.17 of Chapter 6 we see that 
the left is closer to plug flow for both first- and for second-order 
reactions. So we generalize this to any positive order reaction. 
for part (c): 
The right pattern is better because it is closer to plug flow. 
for part (d): 
Turbulent flow has less intermixing of fluids of different ages, 
less bypassing; hence, the right scheme is better. 
Note. In the quantitative analysis that follows we verify this general and impor- 
tant rule. 
Quantitative Treatment, Plug Flow or Batch Reactor. In Chapter 3 we devel- 
oped the equations relating concentration with time for all components of the 
unimolecular-type reactions 


=== PDF PAGE 190 ===
174 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
in batch reactors. The derivations assumed that the feed contained no reaction 
products R or S. If we replace reaction time by the space time, these equations 
apply equally well for plug flow reactors, thus 
The maximum concentration of intermediate and the time at which it occurs is 
given by 
rp,opt - - 
- 
h o g  mean 
k2 - kl 
This is also the point at which the rate of formation of S is most rapid. 
Figure 8.3a, prepared for various k,lk, values, illustrates how this ratio governs 
Figure 8.3a, b Behavior of unimolecular-type reactions 
in a plug flow reactor: (a) concentration-time curves, and (b) relative concentration of the 
reaction components. See Fig. 8.13 for a more detailed figure. 


=== PDF PAGE 191 ===
8.1 Irreversible First-Order Reactions in Series 175 
Figure 8.4 Variables for reactions in series 
(no R or S in the feed) occurring in a mixed 
flow reactor. 
the concentration-time curves of the intermediate R. Figure 8.3b, a time-indepen- 
dent plot, relates the concentration of all reaction components; also see Eq. 37. 
Quantitative Treatment, Mixed Flow Reactor. Let us develop the concentra- 
tion-time curves for this reaction when it takes place in a mixed flow reactor. 
This may be done by referring to Fig. 8.4. Again, the derivation will be limited 
to a feed which contains no reaction product R or S. 
By the steady-state material balance we obtain for any component 
input = output + disappearance by reaction 
(4.1) or (10) 
which for reactant A becomes 
Noting that 
we obtain for A, on rearranging, 
For component R the material balance, Eq. 10, becomes 


=== PDF PAGE 192 ===
176 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
With Eqs. 11 and 12 we obtain, on rearranging, 
C, is found by simply noting that at any time 
C, + CR + C, = C,, 
= constant 
hence 
The location and maximum concentration of R are found by determining 
dCR/d.r, = 0. Thus 
which simplifies neatly to give 
The corresponding concentration of R is given by replacing Eq. 15 in Eq. 13. 
On rearranging, this becomes 
Typical concentration-time curves for various k21k, values are shown in Fig. 
8.5a. A time-independent plot, Fig. 8.5b, relates the concentrations of reactant 
and products. 
Remarks on Performance Characteristics, Kinetic Studies, and Design. Figures 
8.3a and 8.5a show the general time-concentration behavior for plug and mixed 
flow reactors and are an aid in visualizing the actual progress of the reaction. 
Comparison of these figures shows that except when k1 = k2 the plug flow 
reactor always requires a smaller time than does the mixed reactor to achieve 
the maximum concentration of R, the difference in times becoming progressively 


=== PDF PAGE 193 ===
8.1 Irreversible First-Order Reactions in Series 177 
k17 
xA = 1 - cA/cAo 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 8.5a, b Behavior of unimolecular-type reactions 
in a mixed flow reactor: (a) concentration-time curves, and (b) relative concentration of the 
reaction components. See Fig. 8.14 for a more detailed figure. 
larger as k21k, departs from unity (see Eqs. 15 and 9). In addition, for any reaction 
the maximum obtainable concentration of R in a plug flow reactor is always 
higher than the maximum obtainable in a mixed reactor (see Eqs. 16 and 8). 
This verifies the conclusions arrived at by qualitative reasoning. 
Figures 8.3b and 8.5b, time-independent plots, show the distribution of materi- 
als during reaction. Such plots find most use in kinetic studies because they allow 
the determination of k21k, by matching the experimental points with one of the 
family of curves on the appropriate graph. Figures 8.13 and 8.14 are more detailed 
representations of these two figures. Though not shown in the figures, C, can 
be found by difference between CA, and CA + C,. 
Figure 8.6 presents the fractional yield curves for intermediate R as a function 
of the conversion level and the rate constant ratio. These curves clearly show 
that the fractional yield of R is always higher for plug flow than for mixed flow 
for any conversion level. A second important observation in this figure concerns 
the extent of conversion of A we should plan for. If for the reaction considered 
k,lkl is much smaller than unity, we should design for a high conversion of A 
and probably dispense with recycle of unused reactant. However, if k,lk, is 
greater than unity, the fractional yield drops very sharply even at low conversion. 
Hence, to avoid obtaining unwanted S instead of R we must design for a very 
small conversion of A per pass, separation of R, and recycle of unused reactant. 
In such a case large quantities of material will have to be treated in the A-R 
separator and recycled, and this part of the process will figure prominently in 
cost considerations. 


=== PDF PAGE 194 ===
178 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
XA = 1 - cA/cAo 
Figure 8.6 Comparison of the fractional yields of R in mixed flow and 
plug flow reactors for the unimolecular-type reactions 
8.2 FIRST-ORDER FOLLOWED BY ZERO-ORDER REACTION 
Let the reactions be 
k2 
-rA = klCA 
AAR-s 
where K = - 
k 2 1 C ~ 0  
nl=l 
n2=0 
rR= klCA- k2 
kl 
For batch or plug flow with CRo = Cso = 0 integration gives 
and 


=== PDF PAGE 195 ===
8.3 Zero-Order Followed by First-Order Reaction 179 
Concentration 
t 
Initial 
klCA0 
slope 
- k2 ' 
Slope = k 2 1  
fcR, 
max (Eq. 21) 
Get this t from 
k2 + e-kl' = 1 
C~~ 
Figure 8.7 Product distribution for the reactions A %R -% s 
The maximum concentration of intermediate, CR,m,,, and the time when this 
occurs is found to be 
and 
Graphically we show these findings in Fig. 8.7. 
8.3 ZERO-ORDER FOLLOWED BY FIRST-ORDER REACTION 
Let the reactions be 
kl 
k2 
A-R-S nl=O 
nz-1 
= kl - k,cR A present 
= - k,CR 
A absent 
for batch or plug pow with CRO = CSO = 0 integration gives 


=== PDF PAGE 196 ===
180 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Initial slop; = 0 
Figure 8.8 Product distribution for the reactions A S R ~ S  
and 
The maximum concentration of intermediate, C,,,,,, 
and the time when this 
occurs is found to be 
and 
Graphically we show these findings in Fig. 8.8. 
8.4 SUCCESSIVE IRREVERSIBLE REACTIONS OF DIFFERENT 
ORDERS 
In principle, concentration-time curves can be constructed for successive reac- 
tions of different orders. For the plug flow or batch reactor and for the mixed 
reactor explicit solutions are difficult to obtain; thus, numerical methods provide 
the best tool for treating such reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 197 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 181 
For these reactions the concentration-time curves are of little generality for 
they are dependent on the concentration of reactant in the feed. As with reactions 
in parallel, a rise in reactant concentration favors the higher-order reaction; a 
lower concentration favors the lower-order reaction. This causes a shift in C,*, 
, 
and this property can be used to improve the product distribution. 
8.5 REVERSIBLE REACTIONS 
Solution of the equations for successive reversible reactions is quite formidable 
even for the first-order case; thus, we illustrate only the general characteristics 
for a few typical cases. Consider the reversible first-order reactions 
and 
Figures 8.9 and 8.10 display the concentration time curves for the components 
in batch or plug flow for different values of the rate constants. 
Figure 8.9 shows that the concentration of intermediate in reversible series 
reactions need not pass through a maximum, while Fig. 8.10 shows that a product 
may pass through a maximum concentration typical of an intermediate in the 
irreversible series reaction; however, the reactions may be of a different kind. 
A comparison of these figures shows that many of the curves are similar in shape, 
making it difficult to select a mechanism of reaction by experiment, especially 
if the kinetic data are somewhat scattered. Probably the best clue to distinguishing 
between parallel and series reactions is to examine initial rate data-data 
ob- 
tained for very small conversion of reactant. For series reactions the time-concen- 
tration curve for S has a zero initial slope, whereas for parallel reactions this is 
not so. 
8.6 IRREVERSIBLE SERIES-PARALLEL REACTIONS 
Multiple reactions that consist of steps in series and steps in parallel are called 
series-parallel reactions. From the point of view of proper contacting, these 
reactions are more interesting than the simpler types already considered because 
a larger choice of contacting is usually possible, leading to much wider differences 
in product distribution. Thus, design engineers are dealing with a more flexible 
system and this affords them the opportunity to display their talents in devising 
the best of the wide variety of possible contacting patterns. Let us develop our 
ideas with a reaction type that represents a broad class of industrially important 
reactions. We will then generalize our findings to other series-parallel reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 198 ===
182 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
1
1
 
A - R - S  
Figure 8.9 Concentration-time curves for the ele- 
mentary reversible reactions 
From Jungers et al. (1958), p. 207. 


=== PDF PAGE 199 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions I83 
Figure 8.10 Concentration-time curves 
for the elementary reversible parallel re- 
actions 
From Jungers et al. (1958), p. 207. 


=== PDF PAGE 200 ===
184 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
For the reaction set consider the successive attack of a compound by a reactive 
material. The general representation of these reactions is 
A + B & R  
R+B*S 
s + ~ k 3 - T  
etc. 
t B ,  k, 
t B ,  k, 
+B,k, 
A-R-S-T 
where A is the compound to be attacked, B is the reactive material, and R, S, 
T, etc., are the polysubstituted materials formed during reaction. Examples of 
such reactions may be found in the successive substitutive halogenation (or 
nitration) of hydrocarbons, say benzene or methane, to form monohalo, dihalo, 
trihalo, etc., derivatives as shown below: 
Another important example is the addition of alkene oxides, say ethylene oxide, 
to compounds of the proton donor class such as amines, alcohols, water, and 
hydrazine to form monoalkoxy, dialkoxy, trialkoxy, etc., derivatives, some exam- 
ples of which are shown below: 
0 
/ \ 
0 
CH2-CH20H , , 
lH +CH2-CH, 
/ 
+CH, - 
C H ,  
N,- 
H 
N-H 
.. . 
* N 
(CH2 -CH20H), 
\ 
\ 
H 
H 
triethanolamine, TEA 
monoethanolamine, MEA 
0 
H 
/ \  
0 
CH2-CH20H ,, 
+CH,-CH, 
/ 
+CH, - 
CH, 
0 
+ 0 
* O= (CH, -CH20H), 
\ H 
\ H 
diethylene glycol 
ethylene glycol 
Such processes are frequently bimolecular, irreversible, hence second-order ki- 
netically. When occurring in the liquid phase they are also essentially constant- 
density reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 201 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 185 
Two-Step Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 
We first consider the two-step reaction where the first substitution product is 
desired. Actually for an n-step reaction the third and succeeding reactions do 
not occur to any appreciable extent and may be ignored if the mole ratio of A 
to B is high (see qualitative treatment given next). The reaction set considered 
is thus 
With the assumption that the reaction is irreversible, bimolecular, and of constant 
density, the rate expressions are given by 
Qualitative Discussion About Product Distribution. To get the "feel" for what 
takes place when A and B react according to Eq. 31, imagine that we have two 
beakers, one containing A and the other containing B. Should it make any 
difference in the product distribution how we mix A and B? To find out, consider 
the following ways of mixing the reactants: (a) add A slowly to B, (b) add B 
slowly to A, and finally (c) mix A and B together rapidly. 
(a) Add A Slowly to B. For the first alternative pour A a little at a time into 
the beaker containing B, stirring thoroughly and making sure that all the A is 
used up and that the reaction stops before the next bit is added. With each 
addition a bit of R is produced in the beaker. But this R finds itself in an excess 
of B so it will react further to form S. The result is that at no time during the 
slow addition will A and R be present in any appreciable amount. The mixture 
becomes progressively richer in S and poorer in B. This continues until the 
beaker contains only S. Figure 8.11 shows this progressive change. 
(b) Add B Slowly to A. Now pour B a little at a time into the beaker containing 
A, again stirring thoroughly. The first bit of B will be used up, reacting with A 
to form R. This R cannot react further for there is now no B present in the 


=== PDF PAGE 202 ===
186 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Moles A added differentially 
(all A is consumed with each addition) 
Figure 8.11 Distribution of materials in the B 
beaker for the method of mixing shown. 
mixture. With the next addition of B, both A and R will compete with each 
other for the B added, and since A is in very large excess it will react with most 
of the B, producing even more R. This process will be repeated with progressive 
buildup of R and depletion of A until the concentration of R is high enough so 
that it can compete favorably with A for the B added. When this happens, the 
concentration of R reaches a maximum, then decreases. Finally, after addition 
of 2 moles of B for each mole of A, we end up with a solution containing only 
S. This progressive change is shown in Fig. 8.12. 
(c) Mix A and B Rapidly. Now consider the third alternative where the contents 
of the two beakers are rapidly mixed together, the reaction being slow enough 
so that it does not proceed to any appreciable extent before the mixture becomes 
uniform. During the first few reaction increments R finds itself competing with 
a large excess of A for B and hence it is at a disadvantage. Carrying through 
this line of reasoning, we find the same type of distribution curve as for the 
mixture in which B is added slowly to A. This situation is shown in Fig. 8.12. 
The product distribution of Figs. 8.11 and 8.12 are completely different. Thus, 
when A is kept uniform in composition as it reacts, as in Fig. 8.12, then R is 
formed. However, when fresh A is mixed with partly reacted mixture, as in Fig. 
8.11, then no intermediate R forms. But this is precisely the behavior of reactions 
in series. Thus, as far as A, R, and S are concerned, we may view the reactions 
of Eq. 31 as 
+B 
t B 
A-R-S 
A second observation of Fig. 8.12 is that the concentration level of B, whether 
high or low, has no effect on the path of the reaction and on the distribution of 


=== PDF PAGE 203 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 187 
A 
, 
Contents'uniformly 
01 - 
mixed before 
lo 
.- 
L 
reaction starts 
22 L 
F: 
+ a, 
0 n 
c M 
.5 
R + B-tS 
.z 
b E 
5 
U '- 
8 
* 
0 
1 
2 
AB = B, - 8, moles B consumed during reaction 
with either method of mixing reactants 
Figure 8.12 Distribution of materials in the mixing beaker for either of 
the methods of mixing shown. 
products. But this is precisely the behavior of parallel reactions of the same 
order. So with respect to B, Eq. 31 can be looked at as 
From this discussion we propose the general rule: 
Irreversible series-parallel reactions can be analyzed in terms of their 
constituent series reactions and parallel reactions in that optimum 
contacting for favorable product distribution is the same as for the 
constituent reactions. 
For the reactions of Eq. 31 where R is desired this rule shows that the best 
way of contacting A and B is to react A uniformly, while adding B in any 
convenient way. 
This is a powerful generalization which, without needing specific values for 
the rate constants, can already show in many cases which are the favorable 
contacting patterns. It is essential, however, to have the proper representation 
of the stoichiometry and form of rate equation. Example 8.6 and many of the 
problems of Chapter 10 apply these generalizations. 


=== PDF PAGE 204 ===
188 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Quantitative Treatment, Plug Flow or Batch Reactor. Here we quantitatively 
treat the reactions of Eq. 31 with the understanding that R, the intermediate, is 
the desired product, and that the reaction is slow enough so that we may ignore 
the problems of partial reaction during the mixing of reactants. 
In general, taking the ratio of two rate equations eliminates the time variable 
and gives information on the product distribution. So dividing Eq. 34 by Eq. 32 
we obtain the first-order linear differential equation 
whose method of solution is shown in Chapter 3. With no R present in the feed 
the limits of integration are C, to C, for A and C, = 0 for R, and the solution 
of this differential equation is 
with maximum CR at 
This gives the relationship between C, and C, in a batch or in a plug flow 
reactor. To find the concentrations of the other components, simply make a 
material balance. An A balance gives 
from which C, can be found as a function of C, and C,. Finally, a balance about 
B gives 
from which C, can be found. 


=== PDF PAGE 205 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 189 
Quantitative Treatment, Mixed Flow. Writing the design equation for mixed 
flow in terms of A and R gives 
Rearranging, we obtain 
which is the difference equation corresponding to the differential equation, Eq. 
36. Writing CR in terms of CA then gives 
with 
Equations 39 and 40, material balances about A and B in plug flow, hold equally 
well for mixed flow and serve to complete the set of equations giving complete 
product distribution in this reactor. 
Graphical Representation. Figures 8.13 and 8.14, time-independent plots, show 
the distribution of materials in plug and mixed flow and are prepared from Eqs. 
37 to 41. As mentioned earlier, A, R, and S behave like the components in first- 
order reactions in series. Comparing Figs. 8.13 and 8.14 with Figs. 8.3b and 8.5b, 
we see that the distribution of these materials is the same in both cases, plug 
flow again giving a higher concentration of intermediate than mixed flow. The 
lines of slope 2 on these charts show the amount of B consumed to reach any 
particular point on the curve. It makes no difference whether B is added all at 
one time as in a batch reactor or a little at a time as in a semibatch reactor; in 
either case the same point on the chart will be reached when the same total 
amount of B is consumed. 
These figures indicate that no matter what reactor system is selected, when 
the fractional conversion of A is low the fractional yield of R is high. Thus, if 
it is possible to separate R cheaply from a product stream, the optimum setup 
for producing R is to have small conversions per pass coupled with a separation 
of R and recycle of unused A. The actual mode of operation will, as usual, 
depend on the economics of the system under study. 


=== PDF PAGE 206 ===
190 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Figure 8.13 Distribution of materials in a batch or plug flow reactor for the elementary series- 
parallel reactions 
Experimental Determination of the Kinetics of Reaction. The ratio k21kl may 
be found by analyzing the products of reaction from an experiment, and locating 
the corresponding point on the appropriate design chart. The simplest way to 
do this is to use different ratios of B to A in a batch reactor, allowing the reaction 
to go to completion each time. For each run a value of k,lkl can be determined. 


=== PDF PAGE 207 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 191 
Figure 
tions 
8.14 Distribution of materials in a mixed flow reactor for the elementary series-parallel reac- 
The best mole ratios to use are those where the lines of constant k21k, are furthest 
apart, or when -(AB/A,) = 1.0, or close to equimolar ratios. 
With k2/k, known, all that is needed is k, which must be found by kinetic 
experiments. The simplest procedure is to use a large excess of B in which case 
the disappearance of A follows first-order kinetics. 


=== PDF PAGE 208 ===
192 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
KINETICS OF SERIES-PARALLEL REACTION 
From each of the following experiments, what can we say about the rate constants 
of the multiple reactions 
(a) Half a mole of B is poured bit by bit, with stirring, into a flask containing 
a mole of A. The reaction proceeds slowly, and when B is entirely consumed 
0.67 mole of A remains unreacted. 
(b) One mole of A and 1.25 moles of B are rapidly mixed, and the reaction is 
slow enough so that it does not proceed to any appreciable extent before 
homogeneity in composition is achieved. On completion of the reaction, 0.5 
mole of R is found to be present in the mixture. 
(c) One mole of A and 1.25 moles of B are rapidly brought together. The 
reaction is slow enough so that it does not proceed to any appreciable extent 
before homogeneity in A and B is achieved. At the time when 0.9 mole of 
B is consumed, 0.3 mole of S is present in the mixture. 
1 SOLUTION 
The sketches in Fig. E8.2 show how Fig. 8.13 is used to find the desired informa- 
tion. Thus we find: 
(a) k21k, = 4, (b) k21k, = 0.4, (c) k21k, = 1.45 
A 
= 0.67 
A0 
(a) 
Figure E8.2 


=== PDF PAGE 209 ===
8.6 Irreversible Series-Parallel Reactions 193 
Extensions and Applications 
Three or More Reactions. Analysis of three or more reactions can be made 
by procedures analogous to those presented. Of course, the mathematics becomes 
more involved; however, much of the extra labor can be avoided by selecting 
experimental conditions in which only two reactions need be considered at any 
time. Figure 8.15 shows product distribution curves for one such reaction set, 
the progressive chlorination of benzene. 
Catipovic and Levenspiel (1979) have developed charts to represent the first 
three steps of an n-step reaction sequence. Beyond three steps, simple perfor- 
mance charts cannot be prepared. 
Again, as with the two-reaction set, we find that a plug flow reactor yields a 
higher maximum concentration of any intermediate than does a mixed flow re- 
actor. 
Polymerization. The field of polymerization affords an opportunity for a fruitful 
application of these ideas. Often hundreds or even thousands of reactions in 
series occur in the formation of polymers, and the type of crosslinking and 
molecular weight distribution of these products are what gives these materials 
their particular physical properties of solubility, density, flexibility, etc. 
Since the mode of mixing of monomers with their catalysts profoundly affects 
product distribution, great importance must be paid to this factor if the product 
is to have the desired physical and chemical properties. Denbigh (1947, 1951) 
considered some of the many aspects of this problem, and Fig. 8.16 shows for 
various kinetics how reactor type influences the molecular weight distribution 
of products. 
I 
- 
Batch or plug flow 
I 
Mixed 
I 
Figure 8.15 Product distribution in the progressive chlorination of benzene: 
A S B ~ R + U  
C6H6 + C12 A C,H,C~ + HCI 
With k,lk, = 118 and k,Ik, = 11240; from R. B. MacMullin (1948). 


=== PDF PAGE 210 ===
194 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Number of monomer units in polymer 
Figure 8.16 Type of flow and kinetics influence the molecular weight distribution 
of polymer: (a) duration of polymerization reaction (life of active polymer) is 
short compared to the reactor holding time; (b) duration of polymerization reaction 
is long compared to the reactor holding time, or where polymerization has no 
termination reaction. Adapted from Denbigh (1947). 
8.7 THE DENBIGH REACTIONS AND THEIR SPECIAL CASES 
Denbigh (1958) was the first to treat the following rather general reaction scheme 
with 
The performance equations for this reaction scheme reduce directly to all the 
special cases, for example 
This scheme has wide application to a whole host of real reacting systems. 


=== PDF PAGE 211 ===
8.7 The Denhigh Reactions and its Special Cases 195 
These rate equations are all of first order and so to develop the performance 
expressions does not involve complex mathematics, although it may be a tedious 
task. In our treatment we will not present the detailed calculation steps, but will 
just present the final results. 
Batch or Plug Flow Reactors. Integration gives the performance equations for 
this system 
- 
cs 
Cu . . . same as - 
but with k3 -- k4 and C, -- Cuo 
c ~ o  
c ~ o  
For the special case where CRo = Cso = CTo = Cuo = 0 the above expressions 
simplify. We also can find CR = f(CA), thus 
and 
For C,, 
= C, = CTo = Cuo = 0 the behavior of the system is displayed as shown 
in Fig. 8.17. This figure also shows CR,,,, and the time when this occurs in terms 
of the rate constants. 


=== PDF PAGE 212 ===
196 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Zero 'slope 
Figure 8.17 Progress of the Denbigh reaction scheme in a plug flow reactor 
for C, = Cso = C, = C, 
= 0. 
Mixed Flow Reactors. Using the mixed flow performance equation with these 
rates gives 
c u  - 
... 
c s  
same as - 
but with k3 c+ k4 and Cso c+ C, 
c ~ o  
c ~ o  
(55) 
At the optimum 
Graphically, for C, 
= Cso = CTo = Cuo = 0, Fig. 8.18 shows the behavior of 
this system. 


=== PDF PAGE 213 ===
8.7 The Denbigh Reactions and its Special Cases 197 
Ln 
0 
.- 
4- e 
.,- 
K 
w 
C 
0 
0 
v  
c ~ O v  
* T  = - = -  
~ m ,  
R ,  max (Eq, 57) 
F~~ 
Figure 8.18 Progress of the Denbigh reaction scheme in a mixed flow reactor 
for C, 
= C,, = C, = C, 
= 0. 
Comments, Suggestions, and Extensions 
The equations of this chapter can be extended and applied directly to many 
other reaction schemes, for example 
Some problems at the end of this chapter consider these extensions. 
A careful examination of the shape of the C versus 7 curves gives much useful 
information on the rate constants. Here are some clues: 
Look at the initial slope of the curves; measure the slopes. Are the initial 
slopes of produced materials zero or not? 
Measure the final concentration of all the reaction components. 
@ Find when an intermediate reaches its maximum concentration and measure 
this concentration. 
In searching for a model or mechanism for the reaction scheme make runs 
at different C, 
and different CBoICA0. 
If possible, also make runs starting with intermediate. For example, for the 
reaction A + R --+ S start with R alone and follow its disappearance. 
If the two steps of first-order reactions in series have very different values 
for their rate constants, we can approximate the overall behavior as follows: 
k,=100 
k -1 
k 
- 0.99 
A - R ~ S  =+ A-S, 
wherek = - 
- 
1 . 1  


=== PDF PAGE 214 ===
198 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
For schemes involving different reaction orders, for reversible reactions, and 
for a very-many-step scheme typical of polymerizations, analysis becomes 
complicated. 
The key to optimum design for multiple reactions is proper contacting and 
proper flow pattern of fluids within the reactor. These requirements are 
determined by the stoichiometry and observed kinetics. Usually qualitative 
reasoning alone can already determine the correct contacting scheme. This 
is discussed further in Chapter 10. However, to determine the actual equip- 
ment size requires quantitative considerations. 
'
l
~
~
~
&
&
t
~
~
#
t
 EVALUATE THE KINETICS FROM A BATCH EXPERIMENT 
i;d , , a , , \ , 2  ,, 
, , , 
, , , b, , , , 
Japanese researchers very carefully followed the oxidation of sodium sulfide 
Na2S (A) to sodium thiosulfate Na2S203 (R) in a batch reactor. Intermediates 
were measured and the results found were sketched in Fig. E8.3. 
(a) Think up a simple network of reactions, all of first-order, to represent this oxi- 
dation. 
(b) Evaluate the rate constants of this network. 
Initial slope 
of R curve = 
2.0 mmollliter min 
Initial slope 
of S curve = 
1.3 mmollliter min 
min 
Initial Slope of T curve is 
difficult to evaluate, but is z 0 
Figure E8.3 


=== PDF PAGE 215 ===
8.7 The Denbigh Reactions and its Special Cases 199 
I 
This problem draws on a number of techniques. 
(a) First, Look for Clues in the Graph. We first note that the initial slopes of 
the R, S, and T curves are all nonzero, suggesting that these compounds are 
formed directly from A, or 
Next, since there is no S and T in the final product, our suggested reaction 
scheme is 
(b) Evaluate the Rate Constants. Noting that A disappears by first-order kinet- 
ics, we have 
CAO 
185 
In - 
= In - 
= (k, + k, + k3)t = k1,,t = kIz3(30) 
CA 
100 
from which 
k123 = 0.0205 min-l 
From the initial rate for formation of R 
Similarly for S 
So by difference 
k3 = klZ3 - kl - k2 = 0.0205 - 0.0108 - 0.0070 = 0.0027 min-I 


=== PDF PAGE 216 ===
200 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Next, let us look at the maxima of the S and T curves. For S, by an extension 
of Eq. 49, we can write 
Solving for k4 by trial and error gives 
Similarly for T 
So we end up with the following kinetic scheme 
This problem was prepared by David L. Cates (1988). 
kl = 0.0070 min-I 
7s.e 
k2 = 0.0108 min-I 
A u 9" 
with 
k, = 0.0027 min-I 
T 
k4 = 0.0099 min-I 
k, = 0.0163 min-I 
REFERENCES 
Catipovic, N., and Levenspiel, O., Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 18, 558 (1979). 
Denbigh, K. G., Trans. Faraday Soc., 43, 648 (1947). 
Denbigh, K. G., J. Appl. Chem., 1, 227 (1951). 
Denbigh, K. G., Chem. Eng. Sci., 8, 125 (1958). 
Jungers, J. C., et al., Cinktique Chimique Appliqute, Technip, Paris, 1958. 
MacMullin, R. B., Chem. Eng. Prog., 44, 183 (1948). 


=== PDF PAGE 217 ===
Problems 201 
PROBLEMS 
8.1. Starting with separate feeds of reactant A and B of given concentration 
(no dilution with inerts permitted), for the competitive-consecutive reac- 
tions with stoichiometry and rate as shown 
sketch the best contacting patterns for both continuous and noncontinuous 
operations: 
(a) r1 = k1 CAC$j 
(b) r1 = ~ I C A C B  
r2 = k2CRCB 
Y2 = k2cRc$j 
(c) ~1 = klCACB 
(d) r1 = klCiCB 
r2 = k2 C$ CB 
r2 = k2 CR CB 
8.2. Under appropriate conditions A decomposes as follows: 
kl=O.l/rnin 
A-R 
R is to be produced from 1000 literlhr of feed in which CAo = 1 mollliter, 
cRo 
= cso 
= 0. 
(a) What size of plug flow reactor will maximize the concentration of R, 
and what is that concentration in the effluent stream from this reactor? 
(b) What size of mixed flow reactor will maximize the concentration of 
R, and what is CR,,,, in the effluent stream from this reactor? 
Pure A (CAo = 100) is fed to a mixed flow reactor, R and S are formed, 
and the following outlet concentrations are recorded. Find a kinetic scheme 
to fit this data. 
8.3. Run 
c A 
CR 
cs 
8.4. Run 
c A 
CR 
cs 
8.5. Run 
c A 
CR 
cs 
t, min 
1 
50 
40 
10 
5 
2 
20 
40 
40 
20 


=== PDF PAGE 218 ===
202 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
8.6. In grinding a continuous flow of pigments for paint, our company finds 
that too many too-small and too many too-large particles exit from our 
well-mixed grinder. A multistage grinder, approximating plug flow, could 
also have been used, but wasn't. Anyway, in either type of grinder the 
pigments are progressively ground into smaller and smaller particles. 
At present, the exit stream from our well-mixed grinder contains 10% 
too-large (d, > 147 ,urn); 32% just-right (d, = 38 - 14'7 ,urn); and 58% too- 
small (d, < 38 ,urn) particles. 
(a) Can you suggest a better grinding scheme for our present unit, and 
what would it give? 
(b) How about the multistage grinder? How would it do? 
By "better" we mean giving more just right-sized pigment in the product 
stream. Also, separation and recycle of the size cuts is not practical. 
8.7. Consider the following elementary reactions: 
(a) One mole A and 3 moles B are rapidly mixed together. The reaction 
is very slow, allowing analysis of compositions at various times. When 
2.2 moles B remain unreacted, 0.2 mole S is present in the mixture. 
What should be the composition of the mixture (A, B, R, and S) when 
the amount of S present is 0.6 mole? 
(b) One mole A is added bit by bit with constant stirring to 1 mole B. 
Left overnight and then analyzed, 0.5 mole S is found. What can we 
say about k21k,? 
(c) One mole A and 1 mole B are thrown together and mixed in a flask. 
The reaction is very rapid and goes to completion before any rate 
measurements can be made. On analysis of the products of reaction 
0.25 mole S is found to be present. What can we say about k21k,? 
8.8. The liquid phase reaction of aniline with ethanol produces wanted mono- 
ethylaniline and unwanted diethylaniline 
(a) An equimolar feed is introduced into a batch reactor, and reaction is 
allowed to proceed to completion. Find the concentration of reactants 
and products at the end of the run. 
(b) Find the ratio of mono- to diethylaniline produced in a mixed flow 


=== PDF PAGE 219 ===
Problems 203 
reactor for an alcohol-to-aniline feed ratio of 2 to 1 for 70% conversion 
of alcohol. 
(c) For an equimolar feed to a plug flow reactor, what will be the conversion 
of the two reactants when the concentration of monoethylaniline is at 
its highest? 
8.9. Monoethylaniline can also be produced in the vapor phase in a fluidized 
bed using natural bauxite as the solid catalyst. The elementary reactions 
are shown in the previous problem. Using an equimolar feed of aniline 
and ethanol, the fluidized bed produces 3 parts monoethylaniline to 2 parts 
diethylaniline for a 40% conversion of aniline. Assuming mixed flow of gas 
in the fluidized bed, find k21k, and the concentration ratio of reactants and 
products at the exit of the reactor. 
Under the action of mixed enzymes reactant A is converted to products 
as follows: 
t enzyme 
t enzyme 
A - 
R ----+ S, 
kl 
k2 
where the rate constants are dependent on the pH of the system. 
(a) What reactor set-up (plug flow, mixed flow, or staged mixed flow units) 
and what uniform pH level would you use? 
(b) If it were possible to change the pH level along the plug flow reactor, 
or from stage to stage in mixed flow units, in what direction would 
you change the pH level? 
8.10. k, = pH2 - 8 pH + 23 
with 2 < pH < 6, and R the desired product 
k2 = pH + 1 
8.11. k, = pH + 1 
with 2 < pH < 6, and S the desired product 
k 2 = p H 2 - 8 p H + 2 3  
8.12. The progressive chlorination of o- and p-dichlorobenzene proceed with 
second-order rate, as shown in Fig. P8.12. 
Figure P8.12 


=== PDF PAGE 220 ===
204 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
For a single-feed stream having CAo = 2, C,, 
= 1, and 1,2,3-trichloroben- 
zene as the desired product 
(a) Tell which kind of flow reactor is best. 
(b) In this reactor find C,,,,, 
. 
See T. E. Corrigan, Chem. Eng., 201, March 1956, for discussion of this 
process. 
8.13. Consider the following first order decompositions with rate constants as 
shown 
40 
0.1 
0 02 
10 
(a) A-R-S 
(b)A-R-S 
'92 
F 0 l  
T 
U 
T 
U 
If a colleague reports that Cs = 0.2 CAo in the exit stream of a plug flow 
reactor,what can you say about the concentration of the other reactor 
components, A, R, T, and U in the exit stream? 
8.14. Chemicals A and B are thrown into a vat and react away according to the 
following elementary reactions: 
What can you say about these six rate constants if an analysis of the mixture 
shows that 
C, = 5 mollliter 
C, 
= 1 mollliter 
C, = 9 mollliter 
C, = 3 mollliter 
at the time 
(a) when reaction is incomplete? 
(b) when reaction is complete? 
8.15. With a particular catalyst and at a given temperature, the oxidation of 
naphthalene to phthalic anhydride proceeds as follows: 
D 
A = naphthalene 
kl = 0.21 s-l 
Y;< 
4 
R = naphthaquinone 
k2 = 0.20 s-I 
A -  
S--T 
S = phthalic anhydride 
k3 = 4.2 s-I 
T = oxidation products 
k4 = 0.004 s-I 


=== PDF PAGE 221 ===
Problems 205 
What reactor type gives the maximum yield of phthalic anhydride? Roughly 
estimate this yield and the fractional conversion of naphthalene which will 
give this yield. Note the word "roughly". 
8.16. Sandy's Rock and Gravel Company wants to shift a mountain of gravel, 
estimated at about 20 000 tons, from one side of their yard to the other. 
For this they intend to use a power shovel to fill a hopper, which in turn 
feeds a belt conveyor. The latter then transports the gravel to the new 
location. 
The shovel scoops up large amounts of gravel at first; however, as the 
gravel supply decreases, the handling capacity of the shovel also decreases 
because of the increased time required to move away from the hopper for 
a load and then return and dump. Roughly, then, we may estimate that 
the shovel's gravel handling rate is proportional to the size of the pile still 
to be moved, its initial rate being 10 tonlmin. The conveyor, on the other 
hand, transports the gravel at a uniform 5 tonlmin. At first the shovel will 
work faster than the conveyor, then slower. Hence, the storage bin will 
first accumulate material, then empty. 
(a) What will be the largest amount of gravel in the bin? 
(b) When will this occur? 
(c) When will the rates of bin input and output be equal? 
(d) When will the bin become empty? 
8.17. A large fully automated municipal incinerator is being designed. A survey 
estimates the garbage load to be 1440 tonslday. This will be harvested 
by a fleet of compaction trucks which will disgorge their loads into an 
underground storage bin. A conveyor will then feed the garbage to the 
incinerator. 
The proposed daily collection route is such that at the beginning of the 
working day (6 A.M. sharp!) relatively large quantities of garbage (average 
of 6 tonslmin) are returned from nearby commercial areas. Subsequently, 
the supply will diminish as more remote suburban areas are serviced. It is 
assumed that the collection rate is proportional to the amount of garbage 
still to be collected, the initial rate being one truckloadlmin. The conveyor, 
on the other hand, will transport garbage at a uniform 1 tonlmin to the 
incinerator. At the beginning of the working day, the trucks will work 
faster than the conveyor; later in the day, slower. Thus, each day the bin 
will accumulate material, then lose material. 
To evaluate this operation, we need information. Please help us with this. 
(a) At what time of day will the trucks have collected 95% of the day's 
garbage? 
(b) How much garbage whould the storage bin be designed for? 
(c) At what time of day will the bin be fullest? 
(d) At what time of day will the bin be empty? 
8.18. Upper Slobbovians and Lower Slobbovians are always at it. . . , crushing 
skulls, slitting throats, and so on. . . . At any gathering the rate at which 
Upper Slobs are killed is directly proportional to the number of Lower 


=== PDF PAGE 222 ===
206 
Chapter 8 Potpourri of Multiple Reactions 
Slobs around, and vice versa. And at the end of any meeting of these 
friendly people, either Upper Slobs leave or Lower Slobs, but never both. 
Last week ten Upper Slobs happened upon three Lower Slobs, and when 
it was over eight Upper Slobs lived to tell of their exciting victory. 
(a) From this encounter, how would you rate Upper and Lower Slobs as 
fighters? For example, would you say that they were equally good or 
that one Upper Slob is as good as 2.3 Lower Slobs, or what? 
(b) What would be the outcome of a friendly meeting of ten Upper Slobs 
with ten Lower Slobs? 
8.19. Chemical X, a powdered solid, is slowly and continuously fed for half an 
hour into a well-stirred vat of water. The solid quickly dissolves and hydroly- 
ses to Y, which then slowly decomposes to Z as follows 
The volume of liquid in the vat stays close to 3 m3 throughout this operation, 
and if no reaction of Y to Z occurred, the concentration of Y in the vat 
would be 100 mol/m3 at the end of the half-hour addition of X. 
(a) What is the maximum concentration of Y in the vat and at what time 
is this maximum reached? 
(b) What is the concentration of product Z in the vat after 1 hour? 
Problem prepared by Bhaskar Chandan (1990). 
8.20. When oxygen is bubbled through a high-temperature batch of A-containing 
liquid material, A oxidizes slowly to give a slowly decomposing intermediate 
X and final product R. Here are the results of an experiment: 
t, min 
CA, mol/m3 
CR, mol/m3 
100 
0 
95.8 
1.4 
35 
26 
12 
41 
4.0 
52 
1.5 
60 
negligible 
80 
0 
100 
We have no way of analyzing for X; however, we are safe in assuming that 
at any time CA + CR + C, = CAo. What can we say about the mechanism 
and kinetics of this oxidation? Hint: plot the data and examine the plot. 
8.21. Chemical A reacts to form R (k, = 6 hr-') and R reacts away to form S 
(k, = 3 hr-l). In addition R slowly decomposes to form T (k, = 1 hr-I). 
If a solution containing 1.0 mollliter of A is introduced into a batch reactor, 
how long would it take to reach CR,,,,, and what would be CR,,,,? 


=== PDF PAGE 223 ===
Chapter 9 
Temperature and Pressure 
Effects 
In our search for favorable conditions for reaction we have considered how 
reactor type and size influence the extent of conversion and distribution of 
products. The reaction temperature and pressure also influence the progress of 
reactions, and it is the role of these variables that we now consider. 
We follow a three-step procedure: First, we must find how equilibrium composi- 
tion, rate of reaction, and product distribution are affected by changes in op- 
erating temperatures and pressures. This will allow us to determine the optimum 
temperature progression, and it is this that we strive to approximate with a real 
design. Second, chemical reactions are usually accompanied by heat effects, and 
we must know how these will change the temperature of the reacting mixture. 
With this information we are able to propose a number of favorable reactor and 
heat exchange systems-those 
which closely approach the optimum. Finally, 
economic considerations will select one of these favorable systems as the best. 
So, with the emphasis on finding the optimum conditions and then seeing how 
best to approach them in actual design rather than determining what specific 
reactors will do, let us start with discussions of single reactions and follow this 
with the special considerations of multiple reactions. 
9.1 SINGLE REACTIONS 
With single reactions we are concerned with conversion level and reactor stability. 
Questions of product distribution do not occur. 
Thermodynamics gives two important pieces of information, the first being 
the heat liberated or absorbed for a given extent of reaction, the second being 
the maximum possible conversion. Let us briefly summarize these findings. A 
justification of the expressions to follow can be found in any standard thermody- 
namics texts for chemical engineers. 
Heats of Reaction from Thermodynamics 
The heat liberated or absorbed during reaction at temperature T, depends on 
the nature of the reacting system, the amount of material reacting, and the 
207 


=== PDF PAGE 224 ===
208 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
temperature and pressure of the reacting system, and is calculated from the heat 
of reaction AH,, for the reaction in question. When this is not known, it can in 
most cases be calculated from known and tabulated thermochemical data on 
heats of formation AH,. or heats of combustion AH, of the reacting materials. 
These are tabulated at some standard temperature, TI, usually 25°C. As a brief 
reminder, consider the reaction 
By convention we define the heat of reaction at temperature T as the heat 
transferred to the reacting system from the surroundings when a moles of A 
disappear to produce r moles of R and s moles of S with the system measured 
at the same temperature and pressure before and after the change. Thus 
aA + rR + sS, 
AHrT { positive, endothermic 
negative, exothermic 
Heats of Reaction and Temperature. The first problem is to evaluate the heat 
of reaction at temperature T2 knowing the heat of reaction at temperature T,. 
This is found by the law of conservation of energy as follows: 
heat absorbed 
heat added to 
reactants to 
In terms of enthalpies of reactants and products this becomes 
where subscripts 1 and 2 refer to quantities measured at temperatures TI and 
T,, respectively. In terms of specific heats 
AHr2 = AH,, + 
l 2  VC, dT 
TI 
where 
When the molar specific heats are functions of temperatures as follows, 


=== PDF PAGE 225 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 209 
we obtain 
where 
AHr2 = AH,, + j: (Va + VPT + VyT2) dT 
VP 
VY 
= AHrl + Va(T2 - TI) + - 
(Ti - Ti) + - 
(T: - T:) 
2 
3 
Knowing the heat of reaction at any one temperature as well as the specific 
heats of reactants and products in the temperature range concerned allows us 
to calculate the heat of reaction at any other temperature. From this the heat 
effects of the reaction can be found. 
(7) 
, AHr AT VARIOUS TEMPERATURES 
From the AH, and AHf tables, I've calculated that the standard heat of my gas- 
phase reaction at 25OC is as follows: 
At 25°C the reaction is strongly exothermic. But this doesn't interest me because 
I plan to run the reaction at 1025OC. What is the AHr at that temperature, and 
is the reaction still exothermic at that temperature? 
Data. Between 25°C and 1025°C the average Cp values for the various reaction 
components are 
- 
Cp,=35J/mol.K 
G = 4 5 J l m o l . ~  ~ = 7 0 J l m o l . K  
SOLUTION 
First, prepare a reaction map as shown in Fig. E9.1. Then an enthalpy balance 
for 1 mol A, 1 mol B, and 2 mol R gives 
AH, =AH2 + AH, + AH, 
= (n~pAT)reactants 
1A - 1B + A H r , 2 5 ~  + (ncpAT)products 
2R 
= 1(35)(25 - 1025) + 1(45)(25 - 1025) + (-50 000) + 2(70)(1025 - 25) 


=== PDF PAGE 226 ===
210 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
a 
reactants 
1:; 
the 
Figure E9.1 
@ 
exothermic at 25OC 
The reaction is 
endothermic at 1025OC 
Heat the 
products 
AH4 
Equilibrium Constants from Thermodynamics 
From the second law of thermodynamics equilibrium constants, hence equilib- 
rium compositions of reacting systems, may be calculated. We must remember, 
however, that real systems do not necessarily achieve this conversion; therefore, 
the conversions calculated from thermodynamics are only suggested attainable 
values. 
As a brief reminder, the standard free energy AGO for the reaction of Eq. 1 
at temperature T is defined as 
where f is the fugacity of the component at equilibrium conditions; f O  is the 
fugacity of the component at the arbitrarily selected standard state at temperature 
T, the same one used in calculating AGO; Go is the standard free energy of a 
reacting component, tabulated for many compounds; and K is the thermodynamic 
equilibrium constant for the reaction. Standard states at given temperature are 
commonly chosen as follows: 
Gases-pure component at one atmosphere, at which pressure ideal gas behav- 
ior is closely approximated 
Solid-pure 
solid component at unit pressure 
Liquid-pure 
liquid at its vapor pressure 
Solute in liquid-1 
molar solution; or at such dilute concentrations that the 
activity is unity. 


=== PDF PAGE 227 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 211 
For convenience define 
and 
A n = r + s - a  
Simplified forms of Eq. 9 can be obtained for various systems. For gas reactions 
standard states are usually chosen at a pressure of 1 atm. At this low pressure 
the deviation from ideality invariably is small; hence fugacity and pressure are 
identical and f" = p0 = 1 atm. Thus 
The term in braces in this equation and in Eq. 13 is always unity but is retained 
to keep the equations dimensionally correct. 
For any component i of an ideal gas 
Hence 
Kf = Kp 
and 
For a solid component taking part in a reaction, fugacity variations with pres- 
sure are small and can usually be ignored. Hence 
( ~ ) s o l i c i  
component = 3 
Equilibrium Conversion. The equilibrium composition, as governed by the 
equilibrium constant, changes with temperature, and from thermodynamics the 
rate of change is given by 
d(ln K )  
AH, 
-- 
-- 
dT 
R T 2  
On integrating Eq. 15, we see how the equilibrium constant changes with tempera- 
ture. When the heat of reaction AH, can be considered to be constant in the 
temperature interval, integration yields 


=== PDF PAGE 228 ===
212 Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
When the variation of AH, must be accounted for in the integration we have 
where AH, is given by a special form of Eq. 4 in which subscript 0 refers to the 
base temperature 
Replacing Eq. 18 in Eq. 17 and integrating, while using the temperature depen- 
dency for Cp given by Eq. 8, gives 
These expressions allow us to find the variation of the equilibrium constant, 
hence, equilibrium conversion, with temperature. 
The following conclusions may be drawn from thermodynamics. These are 
illustrated in part by Fig. 9.1. 
1. The thermodynamic equilibrium constant is unaffected by the pressure of 
the system, by the presence or absence of inerts, or by the kinetics of the 
reaction, but is affected by the temperature of the system. 
2. Though the thermodynamic equilibrium constant is unaffected by pressure 
or inerts, the equilibrium concentration of materials and equilibrium conver- 
sion of reactants can be influenced by these variables. 
approximates 
irreversible 
reaction 
only very low 
conversions 
possible 
Figure 9.1 Effect of temperature on equilibrium conversion as pre- 
dicted by thermodynamics (pressure fixed.) 


=== PDF PAGE 229 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 213 
3. K S 1 indicates that practically complete conversion may be possible and 
that the reaction can be considered to be irreversible. K < 1 indicates that 
reaction will not proceed to any appreciable extent. 
4. For an increase in temperature, equilibrium conversion rises for endother- 
mic reactions and drops for exothermic reactions. 
5. For an increase in pressure in gas reactions, conversion rises when the 
number of moles decreases with reaction; conversion drops when the num- 
ber of moles increases with reaction. 
6. A decrease in inerts for all reactions acts in the way that an increase in 
pressure acts for gas reactions. 
EQUILIBRIUM CONVERSION AT DIFFERENT 
TEMPERATURES 
(a) Between 0°C and 100°C determine the equilibrium conversion for the 
elementary aqueous reaction 
AG;,, = -14 130 Jlmol 
A a R  
C,, = C,, = constant 
{AH& = 7 . 5  300 Jim01 
I 
Present the results in the form of a plot of temperature versus conversion. 
(b) What restrictions should be placed on the reactor operating isothermally 
if we are to obtain a conversion of 75% or higher? 
I SOLUTION 
(a) With all specific heats alike, VC, = 0. Then from Eq. 4 the heat of reaction 
is independent of temperature and is given by 
AH, = AH,,,, 
= -75 300 Jlmol 
6) 
From Eq. 9 the equilibrium constant at 25OC is given by 
14 130 Jlmol 
= exp((8.314 Jlrnol . K) (298K) = 300 
(ii) 
Since the heat of reaction does not change with temperature, the equilibrium 
constant K at any temperature T is now found from Eq. 16. Thus 


=== PDF PAGE 230 ===
214 Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Rearranging gives 
Replacing K,,, and AH, from Eqs. (i) and (ii) gives on rearranging, 
But at equilibrium 
(iii) 
Putting T values into Eq. (iii), then K into Eq. (iv), as shown in Table E9.2 
gives the changing equilibrium conversion as a function of temperature in the 
range of O"C to 100°C. This result is displayed in Fig. E9.2. 
(b) From the graph we see that the temperature must stay below 78°C if 
conversion of 75% or higher may be expected. 
Table E9.2 Calculating XAe(T) from Eqs. (iii) and (iv) 
Selected Temperature 
K = exp[= RT - 24.71 
XA, 
"C 
K 
from Eq. (iii) 
from Eq. (iv) 


=== PDF PAGE 231 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 215 
Temperature, "C 
Figure E9.2 
General Graphical Design Procedure 
Temperature, composition, and reaction rate are uniquely related for any single 
homogeneous reaction, and this may be represented graphically in one of three 
ways, as shown in Fig. 9.2. The first of these, the composition-temperature plot, 
is the most convenient so we will use it throughout to represent data, to calculate 
reactor sizes, and to compare design alternatives. 
For a given feed (fixed CAo, C,, 
. . .) and using conversion of key component 
as a measure of the composition and extent of reaction, the XA versus T plot 
has the general shape shown in Fig. 9.3. This plot can be prepared either from 
a thermodynamically consistent rate expression for the reaction (the rate must 
be zero at equilibrium) or by interpolating from a given set of kinetic data in 
conjunction with thermodynamic information on the equilibrium. Naturally, the 
reliability of all the calculations and predictions that follow are directly dependent 
on the accuracy of this chart. Hence, it is imperative to obtain good kinetic data 
to construct this chart. 
T 
T 
Composition, C 
Figure 9.2 Different ways of representing the relationship of temperature, composition, 
and rate for a single homogeneous reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 232 ===
216 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Equilibrium, 
Reversible exothermic 
Figure 9.3 General shape of the temperature-conversion plot for different reaction types. 
Reversible endothermic 
The size of reactor required for a given duty and for a given temperature 
progression is found as follows: 
1. Draw the reaction path on the XA versus T plot. This is the operating line 
for the operation. 
2. Find the rates at various XA along this path. 
Along path AB 
XA 
0.05 
T1 
0.3 0.5 
0.8 1 
arbitrary 
temperature 
Recycle flow, 
Figure 9.4 Finding the reactor size for different types of flow and for a feed temperature TI. 


=== PDF PAGE 233 ===
9.1 
Single Reactions 217 
3. Plot the l/(-rA) versus XA curve for this path. 
4. Find the area under this curve. This gives VIFAo. 
For exothermic reactions we illustrate this procedure in Fig. 9.4 for three paths: 
path AB for plug flow with an arbitrary temperature profile, path CD for noniso- 
thermal plug flow with 50% recycle, and point E for mixed flow. Note that for 
mixed flow the operating line reduces to a single point. 
This procedure is quite general, applicable for any kinetics, any temperature 
progression, and any reactor type or any series of reactors. So, once the operating 
line is known. the reactor size can be found. 
CONSTRUCTION OF THE RATE-CONVERSION- 
TEMPERATURE CHART FROM KINETIC DATA 
With the system of Example 9.2 and starting with an R-free solution, kinetic 
experiments in a batch reactor give 58.1% conversion in 1 min at 65OC, 60% 
conversion in 10 min at 25OC. Assuming reversible first-order kinetics, find the 
rate expression for this reaction and prepare the conversion-temperature chart 
with reaction rate as parameter. 
Integrate the Performance Equation. For a reversible first-order reaction, the 
performance equation for a batch reactor is 
According to Eq. 3.54 this integrates to give 
Calculate the Forward Rate Constant. From the batch run at 65OC, noting 
from Example 9.2 that XAe = 0.89, we find with Eq. (i) 
k, (1 min) 
0.89 
or 
kl, 338 = 0.942 min-I 
Similarly, for the batch run at 25°C we find 
kl, 298 = 0.0909 min-I 
(ii) 
(iii) 


=== PDF PAGE 234 ===
218 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Assuming an Arrhenius temperature dependency, the ratio of forward rate con- 
stants at these two temperatures gives 
from which the activation energy of the forward reaction can be evaluated, giving 
Note that there are two activation energies for this reaction, one for the forward 
reaction, another for the reverse. 
Now for the complete rate constant for the forward reaction. From either 
the numerator or the denominator of Eq. (iv) first evaluate k,,, then use it as 
shown below: 
k, = 34 X lo6 exp [-:TI 
- 
= exp [17.34 - - 
RT 
kl 
kl 
Noting that K = -, thus k, = - where K is given by Eq. (iii) of Example 9.2, 
k2 
K' 
we can find the value of k,. 
Summary. For the reversible first-order reaction of Example 9.2 we have 
-- 
-- 
1 
A G R ;  
CR, 
K=-. , 
-Y,= 
rR= klCA- k2cR 
2 
c,, 
Equilibrium: 
K = exp [E 
- 24.71 
RT 
Rate constants: k, = exp 
, min-I 
RT 
, min-l 
From these values the X, versus T chart for any specific C,, can be prepared 
and for this purpose the electronic computer is a great timesaver. Figure E9.3 
is such a plot prepared for C,, = 1 mollliter and CRo = 0. 
Since we are dealing with first-order reactions this plot can be used for any 
C,, value by properly relabeling the rate curves. Thus, for C ,  = 10 mollliter 
simply multiply all the rate values on this graph by a factor of 10. 


=== PDF PAGE 235 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 219 
Temperature, "C + 
Figure E9.3 
Optimum Temperature Progression 
We define the optimum temperature progression to be that progression which 
minimizes VIF,, for a given conversion of reactant. This optimum may be an 
isothermal or it may be a changing temperature: in time for a batch reactor, 
along the length of a plug flow reactor, or from stage to stage for a series of 
mixed flow reactors. It is important to know this progression because it is the 
ideal which we try to approach with a real system. It also allows us to estimate 
how far any real system departs from this ideal. 
The optimum temperature progression in any type of reactor is as follows: At 
any composition, it will always be at the temperature where the rate is a maximum. 
The locus of maximum rates is found by examining the r(T, C) curves of Fig. 
9.4; Fig. 9.5 shows this progression. 
For irreversible reactions, the rate always increases with temperature at any 
composition, so the highest rate occurs at the highest allowable temperature. This 


=== PDF PAGE 236 ===
220 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
lrreversi ble 
E l  
Reversible 
endothermic 
Reversible 
exothermic 
r(f+ki
Best path, 
rates, best 
Best path, 
isothermal 
XA 
isothermal 
I 
1 
I \ 
Tmax, allowable 
Tmax, allowable 
Trnax, allowable 
T 
T 
T 
Figure 9.5 Operating lines for minimum reactor size. 
temperature is set by the materials of construction or by the possible increasing 
importance of side reactions. 
For endothermic reactions a rise in temperature increases both the equilibrium 
conversion and the rate of reaction. Thus, as with irreversible reactions, the 
highest allowable temperature should be used. 
For exothermic reversible reactions the situation is different, for here two 
opposing factors are at work when the temperature is raised-the 
rate of forward 
reaction speeds up but the maximum attainable conversion decreases. Thus, in 
general, a reversible exothermic reaction starts at a high temperature which 
decreases as conversion rises. Figure 9.5 shows this progression, and its precise 
values are found by connecting the maxima of the different rate curves. We call 
this line the locus of maximum rates. 
Heat Effects 
When the heat absorbed or released by reaction can markedly change the temper- 
ature of the reacting fluid, this factor must be accounted for in design. Thus we 
need to use both the material and energy balance expressions, Eqs. 4.1 and 4.2, 
rather than the material balance alone, which was the starting point of all the 
analyses of isothermal operations of Chapters 5 through 8. 
First of all, if the reaction is exothermic and if heat transfer is unable to remove 
all of the liberated heat, then the temperature of the reacting fluid will rise as 
conversion rises. By similar arguments, for endothermic reactions the fluid cools 
as conversion rises. Let us relate this temperature change with extent of con- 
version. 
We start with adiabatic operations, later extending the treatment to account 
for heat interchange with the surroundings. 
Adiabatic Operations 
Consider either a mixed flow reactor, a plug flow reactor, or a section of plug 
flow reactor, in which the conversion is X,, as shown in Fig. 9.6. In Chapters 5 
and 6 one component, usually the limiting reactant, was selected as the basis for 


=== PDF PAGE 237 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 221 
Heat released or absorbed 
Plug flow or section of 
plug flow reactor 
---- 
x
,
,
-
\
 
I 
----J 
' 
Insulated, 1 
adiabatic operations 
Figure 9.6 Adiabatic operations with large enough heat effect to cause a 
rise in temperature (exothermic) or drop in temperature (endothermic) in 
the reacting fluid. 
all material balance calculations. The same procedure is used here, with limiting 
reactant A taken as the basis. Let 
Subscripts 1, 2 refer to temperatures of entering and leaving streams. 
C;, Ci = Mean specific heat of unreacted feed stream and of completely 
converted product stream per mole of entering reactant A. 
H', H" = enthalpy of unreacted feed stream and of completely converted 
product stream per mole of entering reactant A. 
A H  = heat of reaction per mole of entering reacting A, and at tempera- 
ture Ti. 
With TI as the reference temperature on which enthalpies and heats of reaction 
are based we have 
Enthalpy of entering feed: 
Enthalpy of leaving stream: 
Energy absorbed by reaction: 
Replacing these quantities in the energy balance, 
input = output + accumulation + disappearance by reaction 
(4.2) 
we obtain at steady state 


=== PDF PAGE 238 ===
222 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
By rearranging, 
or, with Eq. 18 
/heat needed to raise\ 
CiA T 
feed stream to T, 
x
*
=
:
-
 
AHr, - 1 
heat released by 
\ 
reaction at T, I 
which for complete conversion becomes 
-AHr2 = CLAT, 
for X, = 1 
(23) 
The latter form of the equation simply states that the heat released by reaction 
just balances the heat necessary to raise the reactants from TI to T2. 
The relation between temperature and conversion, as given by the energy 
balances of Eq. 21 or 22, is shown in Fig. 9.7. The resulting lines are straight for 
all practical purposes since the variation of the denominator term of these equa- 
Complete conversion 
f of limiting reactant 
T 
Figure 9.7 Graphical representation of energy balance equa- 
tion for adiabatic operation. These are adiabatic operating 
lines. 


=== PDF PAGE 239 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 223 
tions is relatively small. When Cg - C; = 0, the heat of reaction is independent 
of temperature and Eqs. 21 and 22 reduce to 
which are straight lines in Fig. 9.7. 
This figure illustrates the shape of the energy balance curve for both endother- 
mic and exothermic reactions for both mixed flow and plug flow reactors. This 
representation shows that whatever is the conversion at any point in the reactor, 
the temperature is at its corresponding value on the curve. For plug flow the 
fluid in the reactor moves progressively along the curve, for mixed flow the fluid 
immediately jumps to its final value on the curve. These are the adiabatic operating 
lines for the reactor. With increased inerts Cp rises, and these curves become 
more closely vertical. A vertical line indicates that temperature is unchanged as 
reaction proceeds. This then is the special case of isothermal reactions treated 
in Chapters 5 through 7. 
The size of reactor needed for a given duty is found as follows. For plug flow 
tabulate the rate for various XA along this adiabatic operating line, prepare the 
ll(-r,) 
versus XA plot and integrate. For mixed flow simply use the rate at the 
conditions within the reactor. Figure 9.8 illustrates this procedure. 
The best adiabatic operations of a single plug flow reactor are found by shifting 
the operating line (changing the inlet temperature) to where the rates have the 
highest mean value. For endothermic operations this means starting at the highest 
allowable temperature. For exothermic reactions this means straddling the locus 
of maximum rates as shown in Fig. 9.9. A few trials will locate the best inlet 
temperature, that which minimizes VIF,,. 
For mixed flow the reactor should 
operate on the locus of maximum rates, again shown in Fig. 9.9. 
The best reactor type, that which minimizes VIF,,, 
is found directly from this 
X, versus T graph. If the rate progressively decreases with conversion, then use 
plug flow. This is the case for endothermic reactions (Fig. 9.8~) and close to 
isothermal exothermic reactions. For exothermic reactions that have a large 
temperature rise during reaction, the rate rises from a very low value to a 
maximum at some intermediate XA, then falls. This behavior is characteristic of 
autocatalytic reactions, thus recycle operations are best. Figure 9.10 illustrates 
two situations, one where plug flow is best, the other where large recycle or 
mixed flow is best. The slope of the operating line, CpI-AH,, will determine 
which case one has at hand. Thus 
1. for small CpI-AH, (pure gaseous reactants) mixed flow is best. 
2. for large Cp/-AH, (gas with much inerts, or liquid systems) plug flow is best. 
Nonadiabatic Operations 
For the adiabatic operating line of Fig. 9.7 to more closely approach the ideals 
of Fig. 9.5, we may want deliberately to introduce or remove heat from the 
reactor. In addition, there are heat losses to the surroundings to account for. 


=== PDF PAGE 240 ===
224 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Adiabatic 
line 
0 [2 
point E i c l  
Along path 
1 
1 
XA 
Figure 9.8 Finding reactor size for adiabatic operations of plug flow and mixed 
flow reactors. 
,-Locus of maximum rates 7 
Correct inlet 
temperature 
/
/
/
 
/
I
/
 
/
I
/
 
/
I
/
 
/
/
/
 
Ti 
Ti' 
Ti" 
%-' 
w 
b o  low 1 Too high 
Correct inlet 
temperature 
Figure 9.9 Best location for the adiabatic operating line. For plug flow, a trial 
and error search is needed to find this line; for mixed flow, no search is needed. 


=== PDF PAGE 241 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 225 
Operating line: 
Pure or rich gas 
slope = 
XA 
With small slope 
. 
Liquid or 
dilute gas 
+ 
Very low 
With large slope the rate 
rates here 
continually decreases, 
T 
use plug flow 
Figure 9.10 For exothermic reactions mixed flow is best where the temperature rise 
is large; plug flow is best for close to isothermal systems. 
Let us see how these forms of heat interchange modify the shape of the adiabatic 
operating line. 
Let Q be the total heat added to a reactor per mole of entering reactant A, 
and let this heat also include the losses to the surroundings. Then Eq. 20, the 
energy balance about the system, is modified to 
which on rearrangement and with Eq. 18 gives 
net heat still needed after heat 
CLAT - Q =I 
transfer to raise feed to T, 
XA = 
-AH,, 
heat released by reaction at T, i 
and for C; = C;, which often is a reasonable approximation 
With heat input proportional to AT = T, - TI the energy balance line rotates 
about TI. This change is shown in Fig. 9.11. Other modes of heat addition or 
removal yield corresponding shifts in the energy balance line. 
Using this modified operating line, the procedure for finding the reactor size 
and optimum operations follows directly from the discussion on adiabatic opera- 
tions. 
Comments and Extensions 
Adiabatic operations of an exothermic reaction give a rising temperature with 
conversion. However, the desired progression is one of falling temperature. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 242 ===
226 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Energy balance line for 
adiabatic operations 
Heat removal 
Heat addition 
TI = temperature of feed 
T 
Figure 9.11 Sketch of the energy balance equation show- 
ing the shift in adiabatic line caused by heat exchange 
with surroundings. 
very drastic heat removal may be needed to make the operating line approach 
the ideal, and many schemes may be proposed to do this. As an example, we 
may have heat exchange with the incoming fluid (see Fig. 9.12a), a case treated 
by van Heerden (1953,1958). Another alternative is to have multistage operations 
with interstage cooling between adiabatic sections (see Fig. 9.12b). In general 
multistaging is used when it is impractical to effect the necessary heat exchange 
within the reactor itself. This is usually the case with gas-phase reactions with 
their relatively poor heat transfer characteristics. For endothermic reactions, 
multistaging with reheat between stages is commonly used to keep the tempera- 
ture from dropping too low (see Fig. 9.12~). 
Since the main use of these and many other forms of multistage operations is 
with solid catalyzed gas-phase reactions we discuss these operations in Chapter 
19. Design for homogeneous reactions parallels that for catalytic reactions, so 
the reader is referred to Chapter 19 for the development. 
Exothermic Reactions in Mixed Flow Reactors-A 
Special Problem 
For exothermic reactions in mixed flow (or close to mixed flow) an interesting 
situation may develop in that more than one reactor composition may satisfy 
the governing material and energy balance equations. This means that we may 
not know which conversion level to expect. van Heerden (1953, 1958) was the 
first to treat this problem. Let us examine it. 
First, consider reactant fluid fed at a given rate (fixed r or VIF,,) to a mixed 
flow reactor. At each reactor temperature there will be some particular conver- 
sion which satisfies the material balance equation, Eq. 5.11. At low temperature 
the rate is low so this conversion is low. At higher temperature the conversion 


=== PDF PAGE 243 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 227 
, 
/Desired 
falling 
temperature 
Reaction and 
cooling 
B Tb
\ 
feed of 
\ 
Adiabatic 
Hot 
feed 
out 
out 
Desired constant 
Adiabatic 
/m 
perature :b 
;, 
allowable 
A 
Distance 
(c) 
Figure 9.12 Ways of approaching the ideal temperature profile with heat exchange: (a) 
and (b) exothermic reaction; (c) endothermic reaction. 
rises and approaches the equilibrium. At a still higher temperature we enter the 
region of falling equilibrium so the conversion for given Twill likewise fall. Figure 
9.13 illustrates this behavior for different T values. Note that these lines do not 
represent an operating line or a reaction path. Actually any point on these 
curves represents a particular solution of the material balance equations; thus, 
it represents an operating point for the mixed flow reactor. 
Now, for a given feed temperature TI the intersection of the energy balance 
line with the S-shaped material balance line for the operating T gives the condi- 
tions within the reactor. Here three cases may be distinguished. These are shown 
in Fig. 9.14 for irreversible reactions. 
First, the energy balance line T,A represents the situation where insufficient 
heat is liberated by reaction to raise the temperature to a high enough level for 
the reaction to be self-sustaining. Hence, conversion is negligible. At the other 
extreme, if we have more than enough heat liberated, the fluid will be hot and 
conversion essentially complete. This is shown as line TIB. Finally, line TIC 
indicates an intermediate situation which has three solutions to the material and 


=== PDF PAGE 244 ===
228 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Locus of operating 
t 
points for this T 7 
Irreversible in 
Reversible in 
this T range 
this T range 
Figure 9.13 Conversion in a mixed flow reactor as a function of T and r, from 
the material balance equation, Eq. 5.11. 
energy balance equations, points M', M", and M"'. However, point M" is an 
unstable state because with a small rise in temperature the heat produced (with 
the rapidly rising material balance curve) is greater than the heat consumed by 
the reacting mixture (energy balance curve). The excess heat produced will make 
the temperature rise until Mu' is reached. By similar reasoning, if the temperature 
drops slightly below MI' it will continue to drop until M' is reached. Thus, we 
look upon M" as the ignition point. If the mixture can be raised above this 
temperature, then the reaction will be self-sustaining. 
For reversible exothermic reactions the same three cases occur, as shown in 
Fig. 9.15. However, it can be seen that here there is an optimum operating 
temperature for the given T value where conversion is maximized. Above or 
below this temperature the conversion drops; thus, proper control of heat removal 
is essential. 
The type of behavior described here occurs in systems where the slope of the 
energy balance line, C,I-AH,, is small; thus, large liberation of heat and pure 
reactants which leads to far from isothermal operations. van Heerden (1953, 
1958) discusses and gives examples of this type of reacting system. In addition, 
though it is a much more complex situation, a gas flame illustrates well the 
Practically 
complete 
. conversion7 
A 
TI 
Ignition 
Figure 9.14 Three types of solutions to the energy and material balances for 
exothermic irreversible reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 245 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 229 
Energy balance 1, 
Optimum point of 
intersection of energy and 
material balance curves 
Material balance 
- - 
T1 = feed temperature 
Figure 9.15 Solution of energy and material balances for reversible 
exothermic reaction. 
multiple solutions discussed here: the unreacted state, the reacted state, and the 
ignition point. 
Reactor dynamics, stability, and start-up procedures are particularly important 
for auto-induced reactions such as these. For example, a small change in feed 
rate (7 value), feed composition or temperature, or heat transfer rate may cause 
the reactor output to jump from one operating point to the other. 
PERFORMANCE FOR THE OPTIMAL 
TEMPERATURE PROGRESSION 
Using the optimal temperature progression in a plug flow reactor for the reaction 
of Examples 9.2 and 9.3, 
(a) calculate the space time and volume needed for 80% conversion of a feed 
of FA, = 1000 mollmin where CAo = 4 mollliter. 
(b) plot the temperature and conversion profile along the length of the reactor. 
Let the maximum allowable operating temperature be 95°C. 
Note that Fig. E9.3 was prepared for CAo = 1 mollliter, not 4 mollliter. 
(a) Minimum Space-Time. On the conversion-temperature graph (Fig. E9.3) 
draw the locus of maximum rates. Then, remembering the temperature restric- 
tion, draw the optimum path for this system (line ABCDE in Fig E9.4~) and 


=== PDF PAGE 246 ===
230 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
XA 
1 - 
(-rA) 
0.4 - 
0.2 - 
0 
, , 
25T 
1 
1 
A 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
/ l o 0  
Temperature, "C 
T,,, 
= 9 5 O C  
(a) 
Figure E9.4a 
Figure E9.4b 
Path ABCDE from 
Fig.E4a or E3 
- 
10% of area 
integrate graphically along this path to obtain 
= 0.405 literlmol . min 
Therefore 
and 
V = FA, (area) = (1000 mollmin) (0.405 liter 
- 
- 
405 liters 
(b) T and X, Profiles Through the Reactor. Let us take 10% increments 
through the reactor by taking 10% increments in area under the curve of Fig. 
E9.4b. This procedure gives X, = 0.34 at the 10% point, X, = 0.485 at the 20% 
point, etc. The corresponding temperatures are then 362 K at XA = 0.34 (point 
C), 354 K at X, = 0.485 (point D), etc. 
In addition we note that the temperature starts at 95"C, and at X, = 0.27 
(point B) it drops. Measuring areas in Fig. E9.4b we see that this happens after 
the fluid has passed 7% of the distance through the reactor. 
In this manner the temperature and conversion profiles are found. The result 
is shown in Fig. E9.4~. 


=== PDF PAGE 247 ===
9.1 Single Reactions 231 
Distance through reactor - 
Figure E9.4~ 
OPTIMUM MIXED FLOW REACTOR PERFORMANCE 
A concentrated aqueous A-solution of the previous examples (C, 
= 4 mollliter, 
FA, = 1000 mol/min) is to be 80% converted in a mixed flow reactor. 
(a) What size of reactor is needed? 
(b) What is the heat duty if feed enters at 25°C and product is to be withdrawn 
at this temperature? 
Note that 
1000 cal 1 kg 
1 liter - 
cal 
C p ~ = ~ G i & . - -  
2 5 0 m o l ~ . ~  
(a) Reactor Volume. For CAo = 4 mollliter we may use the XA versus T chart 
of Fig. E9.3 as long as we multiply all rate values on this chart by 4. 
Following Fig. 9.9 the mixed flow operating point should be located where 
the locus of optima intersects the 80% conversion line (point C on Fig. E9.5~). 
Here the reaction rate has the value 
I 
-rA = 0.4 mol A convertedlmin . liter 
From the performance equation for mixed flow reactors, Eq. 5.11, the volume 
required is given by 
FAOX, - (1000 
molimin) 2000 liters 
v=- 
- 
- 
= 
( r )  
0.4 mollmin liter - 


=== PDF PAGE 248 ===
232 Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
/ ' ~ n e r ~ ~  
balance, 
/' 
slope = 1/72 
0.2 
Feed, 25°C 
0 
40 
60 
80 
100 
4:4 
Temperature, "C 
Figure E9.5a 
(b) Heat Duty. Of course we can use joules in our calculations; however, since 
we are dealing with aqueous solutions it is simpler to use calories. Let us use 
calories. Then the slope of the energy balance line is 
C, - (250 callmol A .  K) 
1 
slope = - 
- 
= - 
K-1 
A H  18 000 callmol A) 
72 
Drawing this line through point C (line BCD) we see that the feed must be 
cooled 20" (from point A to point B) before it enters and reacts adiabatically. 
Also, the product must be cooled 37°C (from point C to point E). Thus the heat 
duty is 
Precooler: QAB = (250 callmol A .  K)(20 K) = 5000 callmol A fed 
= (5000 callmol A)(1000 molA1min) = 5000 000 callmin 
= 348.7 kW 
Postcooler: Q,, = (250)(37) = 9250 callmol A fed 
I 
Figure E9.5b shows two reasonable arrangements for the coolers. 


=== PDF PAGE 249 ===
9.1 
Single Reactions 233 
Qout = 349 KW 
Qout = 645 KW 
Qout = 349 KW 
Figure E9.5b 
ADIABATIC PLUG FLOW REACTOR PERFORMANCE 
e size of adiabatic plug flow reactor to react the feed of Example 9.5 (FA, 
= 1000 mollmin and C,, = 4 mollliter) to 80% conversion. 
I SOLUTION 
Following the procedure of Fig. 9.9 draw trial operating lines (see Fig. E9.6~) 
with a slope of 
(from Example 9.5), and for each evaluate the integral 
to find which is smallest. Figures E 9 . 6 ~  and b show this procedure for lines AB 
and CD. Line CD has the smaller area, is in fact closer to the minimum, and is 
Note: These rates are 4 times 
those shown in Fig. E3 
6 
For operating line AB 
For operating line CD 
5 
Area under curve CD 
4 
1 
- 
(-rA) 3 
2 
1 
0 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
l4 
Temperature, "C 
XA 
Figure E9.6 


=== PDF PAGE 250 ===
234 
Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
I 
therefore the desired adiabatic operating line. So 
0.8 dXA 
V = FA, 1, 7 
= FAo (area under curve CD) 
- 
- 
I 
= (1000 mol/min)(1.72 liter. minlmol) 
I 
= 1720 liters 
This volume is somewhat smaller than the volume of mixed flow reactor (from 
Example 9.5) but it is still four times as large as the minimum possible (405 
liters, from Example 9.4). 
Regarding temperatures: Figure E6a shows that the feed must first be cooled 
to 16.0°C, it then passes through the adiabatic reactor and leaves at 73.6OC and 
80% conversion. 
ADIABATIC PLUG FLOW REACTOR WITH RECYCLE 
I 
Repeat Example 9.6 but now allow recycle to product stream. 
For operating line CD of Example 9.6 we find an optimum recycle area, shown 
in Fig. E9.7 as rectangle EFGH. 
Area = (0.8 - 0)(15 liter minlmol) = 1.2 liter. minlmol 
V = FA, (area) = (1000 mol/min)(l.2 literlmol . min) = 1200 liter 
- 
- 
5 
For operating line CD 
4 
1 - 
-'A 
3 
Area = 1.5 (0.8-0) 
2 
1.5 
1 
0 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
XA 
Figure E9.7 


=== PDF PAGE 251 ===
9.2 Multiple Reactions 235 
To summarize the results of these four examples, all of which are performing 
the same duty with the same feed 
for the plug flow with optimal T progression 
V = 405 liter (Example 4) 
for the mixed flow reactor 
V = 2000 liter (Example 5 )  
for the adiabatic plug flow reactor 
V = 1720 liter (Example 6) 
for the adiabatic recycle reactor 
V = 1200 liter (Example 7) 
9.2 MULTIPLE REACTIONS 
As pointed out in the introduction to Chapter 7, in multiple reactions both 
reactor size and product distribution are influenced by the processing conditions. 
Since the problems of reactor size are no different in principle than those for 
single reactions and are usually less important than the problems connected with 
obtaining the desired product material, let us concentrate on the latter problem. 
Thus, we examine how to manipulate the temperature so as to obtain, first, a 
desirable product distribution, and second, the maximum production of desired 
product in a reactor with given space-time. 
In our development we ignore the effect of concentration level by assuming 
that the competing reactions are all of the same order. This effect is studied in 
Chapter 7. 
Product Distribution and Temperature 
If two competing steps in multiple reactions have rate constants k, and k,, then 
the relative rates of these steps are given by 
kl - k,,,e-E1lRT 
- 
- k l ( )  
(E - E R T  
E 
- E,)IRi 
k, k e-EzlRT--e 
' 
20 
k20 
This ratio changes with temperature depending on whether E, is greater or 
smaller than E,, so 
kl/k2 increases if E, > E2 
when T rises 
k,lk, decreases if E, < E, 
Thus the reaction with larger activation energy is the more temperature-sensitive 
of the two reactions. This finding leads to the following general rule on the 
influence of temperature on the relative rates of competing reactions: 
A high temperature favors the reaction of higher activation energy, 
a low temperature favors the reaction of lower activation energy. 


=== PDF PAGE 252 ===
236 Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
Let us apply this rule to find the proper temperature of operations for various 
types of multiple reactions. 
For parallel reactions 
Step 1 is to be promoted, step 2 depressed, so kllk, is to be made as large as 
possible. Thus, from the above rule 
if El > E, use high T 
if El < E, use low T I 
For reactions in series 
2 
A 
Rdeiired 
the production of R is favored if k,lk, is increased. Thus 
if El > E, use high TI 
if El < E, use low T 1 
For the general series-parallel reaction we introduce two additional considera- 
tions. First of all for parallel steps if one requirement is for a high temperature 
and another is for a low temperature, then a particular intermediate temperature 
is best in that it gives the most favorable product distribution. As an example, 
consider the reactions 
' 
2 
A-S 
where El > E2, El < E3 
(31) 
\ 
T 
Now, El > E, requires a high T, El < E3 requires a low T, and it can be shown 
that the most favorable product distribution is obtained when the temperature 
satisfies the following condition 


=== PDF PAGE 253 ===
Problems 237 
Second, for steps in series if an early step needs a high temperature and a later 
step needs a low temperature, then a falling progression of temperatures should 
be used. Analogous arguments hold for other progressions. 
The problems at the end of this chapter verify some of the qualitative findings 
on To,, and also show some possible extension. 
Comments 
This discussion of multiple reactions shows that the relative size of the activation 
energies will tell which temperature level or progression is favored, just as Chap- 
ter 7 showed what concentration level or progression and what state of mixing 
is best. Although the general pattern of low, high, falling, or rising temperature 
can usually be determined without much difficulty, calculation of the optimum 
is not easy. 
In experimentation we usually meet with the inverse of the situation outlined 
here in that we observe product distributions from experiment, and from this 
we wish to find the stoichiometry, kinetics, and the most favorable operating 
conditions. The generalizations of this chapter should be helpful in this induc- 
tive search. 
Finally, when the reactions are of different order and of different activation 
energies, we must combine the methods of Chapters. 7, 8, and 9. Jackson et al. 
(1971) treat a particular system of this type and find that the optimum policy 
requires adjusting only one of the two factors, temperature or concentration, 
while keeping the other at its extreme. Which factor to adjust depends on whether 
the change in product distribution is more temperature dependent or concentra- 
tion dependent. It would be interesting to know whether this finding represents 
a general conclusion. 
REFERENCES 
Jackson, R., Obando, R., and Senior, M. G., Chem. Eng. Sci., 26,853 (1971). 
van Heerden, C., Ind. Eng. Chem., 45,1242 (1953). 
van Heerden, C., Chem. Eng. Sci., 8,133 (1958). 
PROBLEMS 
Examples 9.4 through 9.7 illustrate the approach to problems dealing with noniso- 
thermal reactors. Chapter 19 extends this approach to multistage operations of 
solid catalyzed reactions. 
To reinforce these concepts, Problems 9.1 through 9.9 ask the reader to redo 
these examples with one or more changes. In many of these problems there is 
no need to redo the whole problem, just indicate where changes are needed in 
text and graphs. 


=== PDF PAGE 254 ===
238 Chapter 9 Temperature and Pressure Effects 
9.1. For the reaction system of Example 9.4 
(a) find  needed for 60% conversion of reactant using the optimal tempera- 
ture progression in the plug flow reactor. 
(b) also find the exit temperature of fluid from the reactor. 
Use whatever information you need from Example 9.4. 
9.2. For the mixed flow reactor system of Example 9.5, we wish to get 70% 
conversion in the smallest size of reactor. Sketch your recommended system 
and on it indicate the temperature of the flowing stream entering and 
leaving the reactor as well as T, the space time needed. 
9.3. For the optimum temperature progression in a plug flow reactor in Example 
9.4 (C,, = 4 mollliter, FA, = 1000 mol Almin, XA = 0.8, T,,, = 5"C, T,,, 
= 95°C) and feed and product both at 25"C, how much heating and cooling 
would be needed 
(a) for the feed stream? 
(b) in the reactor itself? 
(c) for the stream leaving the reactor? 
9.4. We plan to run the reaction of Example 9.4 (C,, = 4 mollliter, FA, = 1000 
mollmin) in a plug flow reactor kept at 40°C throughout to 90% conversion. 
Find the volume of reactor needed. 
9.5. Redo Example 9.4 I 
9.8. Redo Example 9.7 1 
9.6. Redo Example 9.5 
9.7. Redo Example 9.6 
9.9. We wish to run the reaction of Example 9.4 in a mixed flow reactor to 
95% conversion for a feed concentration C,, = 10 mollliter and feed rate 
of u = 100 literlmin. What size of reactor would we need? 
where CAo = 4 mollliter is replaced by CAo = 1 
> 
mollliter, and 
where FA, remains unchanged at 1000 mol Almin. 
9.10. Qualitatively find the optimum temperature progression to maximize C, 
for the reaction scheme 


=== PDF PAGE 255 ===
Problems 239 
9.11. The first-order reactions 
A-LRLS 
. 
k - 107e-4000/T 
I ' Y  
desired 
2 - 
k - 108e-9000/T 
T 
U 
3 - 
k, = 1012e-12,000/T 
are to be run in two mixed flow reactors in series anywhere between 10 
and 90°C. If the reactors may be kept at different temperatures, what 
should these temperatures be for maximum fractional yield of S? Find this 
fractional yield. 
9.12. The reversible first-order gas reaction 
is to be carried out in a mixed flow reactor. For operations at 300 K the 
volume of reactor required is 100 liters for 60% conversion of A. What 
should be the volume of the reactor for the same feed rate and conversion 
but with operations at 400 K? 
Data: kl = lo3 exp [-2416/T] 
ACp = CPR - CpA = 0 
AH, = -8000 callmol at 300 K 
K = 10 at 300 K 
Feed consists of pure A 
Total pressure stays constant 


=== PDF PAGE 256 ===
Chapter 10 
Choosing the Right Kind 
of Reactor 
So far we have concentrated on homogeneous reactions in ideal reactors. The 
reason is two-fold; because this is the simplest of systems to analyze and is the 
easiest to understand and master; also because the rules for good reactor behavior 
for homogeneous systems can often be applied directly to heterogeneous systems. 
The important lessons learned in the first nine chapters of this book should 
guide us right away, or with a very minimum of calculations, to the optimum 
reactor system. Previously we have come up with six general rules. Let us present 
them and then practice using them. 
Rule 1. For Single Reactions 
To minimize the reactor volume, keep the concentration as high as possible 
for a reactant whose order is n > 0. For components where n < 0 keep the 
concentration low. 
Rule 2. For Reactions in Series 
Consider reactions in series, as shown: 
To maximize any intermediate, do not mix fluids that have different concentra- 
tions of the active ingredients-reactant 
or intermediates. See Fig. 10.1. 
Rule 3. For Parallel Reactions 
Consider the parallel reactions with reaction orders ni 
xRdesir 
ed 
nl 
low order 
A-S 
n2 ... intermediate 
't 
ng ... high order 
T 


=== PDF PAGE 257 ===
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 241 
Recycle 
/This 
fresh feed 
I 
mixes with partly, 
reacted f l u ~ d  
0 0 
(a) 
(h) 
Figure 10.1 (a) Plug flow (no intermixing) gives the most of all the intermedi- 
ates. (b) Intermixing depresses the formation of all intermediates. 
To get the best product distribution, 
low C, favors the reaction of lowest order 
high C, favors the reaction of highest order 
If the desired reaction is of intermediate order then some intermediate C, 
will give the best product distribution. 
For reactions all of the same order the product distribution is not affected 
by the concentration level. 
Rule 4. Complex Reactions 
These networks can be analyzed by breaking them down into their simple series 
and simple parallel components. For example, for the following elementary 
reactions, where R is the desired product, the breakdown is as follows: 
This breakdown means that A and R should be in plug flow, without any recycle, 
while B can be introduced as you wish, at any concentration level, since it will 
not affect the product distribution. 
Rule 5. Continuous versus Noncontinuous Operations 
Any product distribution that can be obtained in continuous steady-state flow 
operations can be gotten in a non-flow operation and vice versa. Figure 10.2 
illustrates this. 


=== PDF PAGE 258 ===
242 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
Flow reactor 
Nonflow reactor 
Add all f l u ~ d  
Equ~valent 
at one t ~ m e  
Figure 10.2 Correspondence between the residence 
and either non-flow, batch or semibatch systems. 
, Fill slowly 
Keep cornposlt~on 
Rule 6. Effect of Temperature on Product Distribution 
Given 
time distribution of steady flow 
a high temperature favors the reaction with larger E, while a low temperature 
favors the reaction with smaller E. 
Let us now see how these six rules can be used to guide us to the optimum. 
Optimum Operation of Reactors 
In reactor operations the word "optimum" can have different meanings. Let us 
look at two definitions which are particularly useful. 
Feed a stream containing reactant A to a reactor and let R, S, T, . . . be formed, 
with R being the desired product. Then by optimum 
1. we could mean maximizing the overall fractional yield of R, or 
@(;) 
= ( moles R formed 
moles of A consumed 


=== PDF PAGE 259 ===
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 243 
2. we could mean running the reactor system so that the production of R is 
maximized, or 
moles of R formed 
(Prod R),,,,, = ( moles of A fed to the system 
For reactions in series we calculate the maximum production rate of R directly, 
as shown in Chapter 8. However, for reactions in parallel we find it useful to 
first evaluate the instantaneous fractional yield of R, or 
moles R formed 
moles A consumed 
and then proceed to find the optimum. This procedure is shown in Chapter 7. 
If unused reactant can be separated from the exit stream, reconcentrated to 
feed conditions and then recycled, then 
(Prod R),,, 
= @(RIA),,, 
(4) 
THE TRAMBOUZE REACTIONS (1958). 
The elementary reactions 
are to be run in four equal-size MFR's (mixed flow reactors), connected any 
way you wish. The feed is C,, 
= 1, the feed flow rate is u = 100 literslmin. 
The best scheme that the computer could come up with to maximize the 
fractional yield of S, or @(S/A) [see problem 5, Chem. Eng. Sci., 45, 595-614 
(1990)], is shown in Fig. ElO.la. 
(a) How would you arrange a four-MFR system? 
(b) With your best system what should be the volume of your four reactors? 
I 
Figure ElO.la 


=== PDF PAGE 260 ===
244 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
(a) First of all, the computer solution looks somewhat complicated from the 
engineering point of view. But never mind, let us proceed with our calcula- 
tions. The instantaneous fractional yield, q(S/A), is 
To maximize (p(SIA) put 
Solving gives 
- 0.25 
C ~ o p t  - - 
- - 
- 
So from Eq. (i), at C,,,,, 
Thus the best way of running these four reactors is to keep the conditions 
at the optimum in all four units. One such design is shown in Fig. ElO.lb. 
Problem P20 shows another design, and so does Fig. ElO.la. 
C~ opt - 
CS opt 
V =  187.5 liters 
Figure ElO.lb 


=== PDF PAGE 261 ===
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 245 
(b) The volume per MFR comes from the performance equation 
= 187.5 liters 
Therefore, for the four reactor system 
I&,, 
= 187.5 X 4 = 750 liters 
- 
TEMPERATURE PROGRESSION FOR MULTIPLE 
REACTIONS 
I 
I 
Consider the following scheme of elementary reactions: 
What temperature progression would you recommend if the desired product is: 
and if reactor size is not important? 
This industrially important reaction scheme is reported by Binns et al. (1969) 
and is used by Husain and Gangiah (1976, p. 245). In this problem we inter- 
changed two of the reported E values to make the problem more interesting. 
(a) Intermediate R is Desired 
We want step 1 fast compared to step 2, and 
we want step 1 fast compared to step 3. 
I 
Since El < E2 and El < E, use a low temperature and plug flow. 


=== PDF PAGE 262 ===
246 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
I 
(b) Final Product S is Desired 
Here speed is all that matters. 
So use a high temperature and plug flow. 
(c) Intermediate T is Desired 
We want step 2 fast compared to step 1, and 
we want step 2 fast compared to step 4. 
Since E, > E, and E, < E4 use a falling temperature and plug flow 
(d) Intermediate U is Desired 
We want step 1 fast compared to step 2, and 
step 3 fast compared to step 5. 
Since E, < E, and E, > E5 use a rising temperature and plug flow 
REFERENCES 
Binns, D.T., Kantyka, T.A., and Welland, R.C., Trans. I. Chem. E., 47, T53 (1969). 
Husain, A., and Gangiah, K., Optimization Techniques for Chemical Engineers, Macmillan 
of India, Delhi (1976). 
Trambouze, P.J., and Piret, E.L., AIChE J, 5, 384 (1959). 
van der Vusse, J.G., Chem. Eng. Sci., 19, 994 (1964). 
PROBLEMS 
10.1. Given the two reactions 
where R is the desired product and is to be maximized. Rate the four 
schemes shown in Fig. P10.1-either 
"good" or "not so good," Please, 
no complicated calculations, just reason it out. 
A
A
A
 
(c) 
Figure P1O.l 


=== PDF PAGE 263 ===
Problems 247 
10.2. Repeat Problem 1 with just one change 
10.3. Repeat Problem 1 with just one change 
10.4. For the reactions 
where R is the desired product, which of the following ways of running 
a batch reactor is favorable, which is not? See Fig. P10.4. 
Dump A & B lnto 
the reactor 
all at one t ~ m e  
Add B drop 
Add A drop 
by drop 
by drop 
Figure P10.4 
10.5. The Oxydation of Xylene. The violent oxidation of xylene simply produces 
CO, and H,O; 
however, when oxidation is gentle and carefully controlled, 
it can also produce useful quantities of valuable phthalic anhydride as 
shown in Fig. P10.5. Also, because of the danger of explosion, the fraction 
CO,, H20 
anhydride 
xylene 
CO,, H20 
Figure P10.5 


=== PDF PAGE 264 ===
248 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
of xylene in the reacting mixture must be kept below 1%. Naturally, the 
problem in this process is to obtain a favorable product distribution. 
(a) In a plug flow reactor what values of the three activation energies 
would require that we operate at the maximum allowable temper- 
ature? 
(b) Under what circumstances should the plug flow reactor have a falling 
temperature progression? 
10.6. The Trambouze Reactions-Reactions 
in parallel. Given the set of ele- 
mentary reactions with a feed of CAO = 1 mollliter and v = 100 literslmin 
we wish to maximize the fractional yield, not the production of S, in a 
reactor arrangement of your choice. 
$%eked 
r~ = ko 
ko = 0.025 mol/liter.min 
A-S 
... rS = klCA 
kl = 0.2 min-I 
Y 
... 
T 
r~ = k2c; 
k2 = 0.4 1iterlmol.min 
The computer, going through a multidimensional search [see problem 
3, Chem. Eng. Sci., 45,595-614 (1990)l came up with the arrangement of 
Fig. P10.6, which the authors claim is a LOCAL optimum, or a STATION- 
ARY POINT. We are not interested in LOCAL optima, if such things 
exist. We are interested in finding the GLOBAL optimum. So with this 
in mind, 
(a) do you judge that the arrangement of Fig. P10.6 is the best set up? 
(b) if not, suggest a better scheme. Sketch your scheme and calculate the 
volume of the reactors you plan to use. 
vo = 100 literslmin 20 literslrnin 
= 600.63 liters 
liters 
Figure P10.6 
10.7. For the set of elementary reactions of Problem 10.6, with a feed of 
CAo = 1 mollliter and v = 100 literslmin we now wish to maximize the 
production rate of intermediate S (not the fractional yield) in a reactor 
arrangement of your choice. Sketch your chosen reactor scheme and 
determine C,,,,, 
obtainable. 
10.8. Automobile Antifreeze. Ethylene glycol and diethylene glycol are used 
as automobile antifreeze, and are produced by the reactions of ethylene 
oxide with water, as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 265 ===
Problems 249 
/CH2-CH20H 
/ CH2 - 
CH20H 
O\H 
+ CH2 - 
CH2 
--+ O\CH, - 
CH,OH 
------------------ 
diethylene glycol 
A mole of either glycol in water is as effective as the other in reducing 
the freezing point of water; however, on a molar basis the diethylene 
glycol is twice as expensive as the ethylene glycol. So we want to maximize 
ethylene glycol, and minimize the diethylene glycol in the mixture. 
One of the country's largest suppliers produced millions of kilograms of 
antifreeze annually in reactors shown in Fig. P10.8~. One of the company's 
engineers suggested that they replace their reactors with one of the type 
shown in Fig. P10.8b. What do you think of this suggestion? 
,- 500 m of 10 cm ID pipe 
EtOx 
+ - 
water 
Fluid moves 
lazily 
(a) 
Figure P10.8~ & P10.8b 
10.9. The Homogeneous Catalytic Reaction. Consider the elementary reaction 
k 
A + B -2B, 
-r, = kCACB with k = 0.4 literlmol . min 
For the following feed and reactor space time 
Flow rate 
v = 100 literslmin 
C,, = 0.45 mollliter 
Feed composition 
CBo = 0.55 mollliter 
Space time 
T =  1 min 
we want to maximize the concentration of B in the product stream. Our 
clever computer [see problem 8, Chem. Eng. Sci., 45, 595-614 (1990)l 
gives the design of Fig. P10.9 as its best try. 


=== PDF PAGE 266 ===
250 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
Figure P10.9 
Do you think that this is the best way to run this reaction? If not, 
suggest a better scheme. Do not bother to calculate reactor size, recycle 
rate, etc. Just indicate a better scheme. 
10.10. To Color Cola Drinks. When viscous corn syrup is heated it caramelizes 
(turns a deep dark brown). However, if it is heated a bit too long it 
transforms into carbon 
corn 
heat 
more 
carbon 
----)caramel 
syrup 
particles 
Very long tube of just the right 
length so as to maximize 
154°C 
Corn 
syrup 
Heat 
(a) Present reactor 
(b) Proposed reactor 
Figure P1O.10 (a) Present reactor; (b) Proposed design. 
The caramelized liquid is sent by railroad tank cars to the cola syrup 
formulators, who then test the solution for quality. If it is too light in 
color-penalty; if it has too many carbon particles per unit volume, then 
the whole tank car is rejected. There is thus a delicate balance between 
underreacting and overreacting. 
At present a batch of corn syrup is heated at 154°C in a vat for a precise 
time. Then it is rapidly discharged and cooled, the vat is thoroughly 
cleaned (very labor intensive), and then is recharged. 
The company wants to reduce costs and replace this costly labor inten- 
sive batch operation with a continuous flow system. Of course it will be 
a tubular reactor (rule 2). What do you think of their idea? Comment 
please, as you sit and sip your Coke or Pepsi. 


=== PDF PAGE 267 ===
Problems 251 
10.11. The Denbigh Reactions. We intend to run the reactions below: 
kl = 1.0 1iterImol.s 
2nd order 
k2 = k, = 0.6 s- 1 
1st order 
T 
U 
k4 = 0.1 1iterlrnol.s 
2nd order 
in a flow system under the following conditions 
Feed flow rate 
v = 100 litersls 
CAo = 6 mollliter 
Feed composition 
C, = 0.6 mollliter 
We want to maximize the concentration ratio of CR/& in the product 
stream. 
As reported [see problem 7, Chem. Eng. Sci., 45, 595-614 (1990)], 
the attack on this problem used 2077 continuous variables, 204 integer 
variables, 2108 constraints, and gave as an optimal solution the design 
shown in Fig. P1O.ll. 
(a) Do you think you could do better? If so, what reactor design would 
you suggest we use, and what C,/C, would you expect to obtain? 
(b) If you wished to minimize the ratio of CR/&, how would you go 
about it? 
(2) 
is maximized ? 
Figure P1O.ll 
10.12. For the homogeneous catalytic reaction 
and with a feed of CAo = 90 mol/m3, CBo = 10 mol/m3 we want about 
44% conversion of reactant A. What flow reactor or combination of flow 
reactors is best in that it gives the smallest total volume of reactors needed? 
There is no need to try to calculate the size of reactors needed; just 
determine the type of reactor system that is best and the type of flow that 
should be used. 
10.13. Repeat Problem 12 with just one change. We need 90% conversion of 
reactant A. 


=== PDF PAGE 268 ===
252 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
10.14. Repeat Problem 12 with just one change. We only want about 20% conver- 
sion of reactant A. 
10.15. We want to produce R from A in a batch reactor with a run time no 
greater than 2 hours and at a temperature somewhere between 5 and 
90°C. The kinetics of this liquid first-order reaction system is as follows: 
Determine the optimum temperature (to give C,) 
and run time to use, 
and the corresponding conversion of A to R. 
10.16. Reactor-Separator-Recycle System-Benzene Chlorination. Here the el- 
ementary reactions are 
1 
C6H6 + C1, - 
C6H,C1 + HC1 
k1 = 0.412 literlkmol . hr 
C6H5Cl + C12 
C6H,C12 + HC1 
k2 = 0.055 literlkmol . hr 
The desired product is monochlorobenzene. Also assume that any unre- 
acted benzene in the product stream can be cleanly separated and reused 
as desired. 
With the requirement that we only use PFRs, a minimum of three, in 
any arrangement, plus separator and recycle of unused reactant, the best 
of which was determined by the computer [see case 3, Chem. Eng. Sci., 
46, 1361-1383 (1991)l is shown in Fig. P10.16. 
Can you do better? There is no need to calculate volumes and flow 
rates. Just come up with an improved scheme. 
Benzene stream 
Benzene 
separator 
Mono and 
dichlorobenzene 
Figure P10.16 
10.17. Acrolein Production. Adams et al. [J. Catalysis, 3,379 (1964)l studied the 
catalytic oxidation of propylene on bismuth molybdate catalyst to form 
acrolein. With a feed of propylene and oxygen and reaction at 460"C, the 
following three reactions occur. 


=== PDF PAGE 269 ===
Problems 253 
The reactions are all of first order in olefin and independent of oxygen 
and of reaction products, and with reaction rate ratios 
If no cooling is needed to keep the reaction close to 460°C and if no 
separation and recycle of unused C,H6 is allowed, what kind of contactor 
would you suggest be used and what should be the maximum expected 
production rate of acrolein from this reactor? 
10.18. Nonisothermal van der Vusse Reactions (1964). Consider the following 
reactions: 
where the Arrhenius activation energy is given in units of Jlmol, C, is to 
be maximized and CAo = 1 mol/liter. 
Insisting on using three MFR's with T~ between 0.1 and 20 s [see example 
2, AIChE J, 40,849 (1994)], with possible intercooling and a temperature 
range between 360 K and 396 K, the best scheme calculated by the com- 
puter is shown in Fig. P10.18. 
(a) Do you like this design? If not, what do you suggest we do with this 
three-reactor system? Please retain the three MFR's. 
(b) What CR/CAo could be obtained and what T should be used with 
the best reactor scheme (plug, mixed, or combined) and with ideal 
heat transfer? 
Figure P10.18 


=== PDF PAGE 270 ===
254 
Chapter 10 Choosing the Right Kind of Reactor 
10.19. Phthalic Anhydride from Naphthalene. The accepted mechanism for the 
highly exothermic solid catalyzed oxidation of naphthalene to produce 
phthalic anhydride is 
k, = k, = 2 X 1013 exp(-159000lRT) 
[hr-'1 
where 
k, = 8.15 X 1017 exp(-209000lRT) 
[hill 
k4 = 2.1 X lo5 exp(-83600lRT) 
[hr-'1 
and where 
A = naphthalene (reactant) 
R = naphthaquinone (postulated intermediate) 
S = phthalic anhydride (desired product) 
T = CO, + H,O (waste products) 
and the Arrenhius activation energy is given in units of Jlmol. This reaction 
is to be run somewhere between 900 K and 1200 K. 
A local optimum reactor setup discovered by the computer [see example 
1, Chem. Eng. Sci., 49, 1037-1051 (1994)l is shown in Fig. P10.19. 
Heat 
/exchangers\ 
Figure P10.19 
(a) Do you like this design? Could you do better? If so, how? 
(b) If you could keep the whole of your reactors at whatever temperature 
and 7 value desired, and if recyle is allowed, how much phthalic 
anhydride could be produced per mole of naphthalene reacted? 
Suggestion: Why not determine the values of k,, k,, k,, and k, for both 
extremes of temperature, look at the values, and then proceed with the so- 
lution? 
10.20. Professor Turton dislikes using reactors in parallel, and he cringed when 
he saw my recommended "best" design for Example 10.1. He much prefers 
using reactors in series, and so for that example he suggests using the 
design of Figure ElO.la, but without any recycle of fluid. 
Determine the fractional yield of S, cP (SIA), obtainable with Turton's 
design, and see if it matches that found in Example 10.1. 


=== PDF PAGE 271 ===
Part I1 
Flow Pattern, Contacting, and 
Non-Ideal Flow 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 1257 
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 1283 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 1293 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 1321 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 1339 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 1350 


=== PDF PAGE 272 ===


=== PDF PAGE 273 ===
Chapter 11 
Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
So far we have treated two flow patterns, plug flow and mixed flow. These can 
give very different behavior (size of reactor, distribution of products). We like 
these flow patterns and in most cases we try to design equipment to approach 
one or the other because 
one or the other often is optimum no matter what we are designing for. 
these two patterns are simple to treat. 
But real equipment always deviates from these ideals. How to account for this? 
That is what this and the following chapters are about. 
Overall three somewhat interrelated factors make up the contacting or flow 
pattern: 
1. the RTD or residence time distribution of material which is flowing through 
the vessel 
2. the state of aggregation of the flowing material, its tendency to clump and 
for a group of molecules to move about together 
3. the earliness and lateness of mixing of material in the vessel. 
Let us discuss these three factors in a qualitative way at first. Then, this and the 
next few chapters treat these factors and show how they affect reactor behavior. 
The Residence Time Distribution, RTD 
Deviation from the two ideal flow patterns can be caused by channeling of fluid, 
by recycling of fluid, or by creation of stagnant regions in the vessel. Figure 11.1 
shows this behavior. In all types of process equipment, such as heat exchangers, 
packed columns, and reactors, this type of flow should be avoided since it always 
lowers the performance of the unit. 
If we know precisely what is happening within the vessel, thus if we have a 
complete velocity distribution map for the fluid in the vessel, then we should, 
in principle, be able to predict the behavior of a vessel as a reactor. Unfortunately, 
this approach is impractical, even in today's computer age. 
257 


=== PDF PAGE 274 ===
258 
Chapter I1 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Stagnant regions -/ 
Packed bed 
Channeling, especially 
serious in countercurrent 
two-phase operations 
Figure 11.1 Nonideal flow patterns which may exist in process 
equipment. 
Setting aside this goal of complete knowledge about the flow, let us be less 
ambitious and see what it is that we actually need to know. In many cases we 
really do not need to know very much, simply how long the individual molecules 
stay in the vessel, or more precisely, the distribution of residence times of the 
flowing fluid. This information can be determined easily and directly by a widely 
used method of inquiry, the stimulus-response experiment. 
This chapter deals in large part with the residence time distribution (or RTD) 
approach to nonideal flow. We show when it may legitimately be used, how to 
use it, and when it is not applicable what alternatives to turn to. 
In developing the "language" for this treatment of nonideal flow (see Danck- 
werts, 1953), we will only consider the steady-state flow, without reaction and 
without density change, of a single fluid through a vessel. 
State of Aggregation of the Flowing Stream 
Flowing material is in some particular state of aggregation, depending on its 
nature. In the extremes these states can be called microfluids and macrofluids, 
as sketched in Fig. 11.2. 
Single-Phase Systems. These lie somewhere between the extremes of macro- 
and microfluids. 


=== PDF PAGE 275 ===
Ch,apter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 259 
Gases and ordinary 
not very viscous 
liquids 
Noncoalescing droplets 
Solid particles 
Very viscous liquids 
[Individual 
molecules are free 
to move about and intermix 
Molecules are kept 
grouped together in 
aggregates or packets 
Figure 11.2 Two extremes of aggregation of fluid. 
Two-Phase Systems. A stream of solids always behaves as a macrofluid, but 
for gas reacting with liquid, either phase can be a macro- or microfluid depending 
on the contacting scheme being used. The sketches of Fig. 11.3 show completely 
opposite behavior. We treat these two phase reactors in later chapters. 
Earliness of Mixing 
The fluid elements of a single flowing stream can mix with each other either 
early or late in their flow through the vessel. For example, see Fig. 11.4. 
Usually this factor has little effect on overall behavior for a single flowing 
fluid. However, for a system with two entering reactant streams it can be very 
important. For example, see Fig. 11.5. 
Role of RTD, State of Aggregation, and Earliness of Mixing in Determining 
Reactor Behavior 
In some situations one of these three factors can be ignored; in others it can 
become crucial. Often, much depends on the time for reaction, t,, 
the time for 
Sparger 
reactor 
G 
,- 
in liauid 
G 
L e r e  gas is a macrofluid 
while liquid is a rnicrofluid 
Spray tower 
reactor 
. . 
/ $ 
Liquid droplets 
in gas 
L 
Here gas us a rnicrofluid 
while liquid is a macrofluid 
Figure 11.3 Examples of macro- and microfluid behavior. 


=== PDF PAGE 276 ===
264) Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Early mixing 
Uniform mixing 
Late mixing 
Lots of mixing 
Flat 1 
l S a m e  along 
of young and 
velocity 
the whole 
old fluid 
profile 
vessel 
NO mixing ' 
Well-mixed 
of young and 
region 
old fluid 
Figure 11.4 Examples of early and of late mixing of fluid. 
mixing t,,, and the time for stay in the vessel t,,,,. In many cases <,, has a 
meaning somewhat like t,, but somewhat broader. 
11.1 E, THE AGE DISTRIBUTION OF FLUID, THE RTD 
It is evident that elements of fluid taking different routes through the reactor 
may take different lengths of time to pass through the vessel. The distribution 
of these times for the stream of fluid leaving the vessel is called the exit age 
distribution E, or the residence time distribution RTD of fluid. E has the units 
of time-l. 
We find it convenient to represent the RTD in such a way that the area under 
the curve is unity, or 
This procedure is called normalizing the distribution, and Fig. 11.6 shows this. 
We should note one restriction on the E curve-that 
the fluid only enters and 
only leaves the vessel one time. This means that there should be no flow or 
diffusion or upflow eddies at the entrance or at the vessel exit. We call this the 
closed vessel boundary condition. Where elements of fluid can cross the vessel 
boundary more than one time we call this the open vessel boundary condition. 
With this representation the fraction of exit stream of age* between t and t + 
dt is 
Well mixed at entry, 
Separate parallel 
L Mixing only occurs 
so A and B have 
flows so A and B 
at exit leaving no 
lots of time for reaction 
are unable to react 
time for reaction 
Figure 11.5 Early or late mixing affects reactor behavior. 
* The term "age" for an element of the exit stream refers t o  the time spent by that element in the vessel. 


=== PDF PAGE 277 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 261 
Figure 11.6 The exit age distribution curve E for 
fluid flowing through a vessel; also called the resi- 
dence time distribution, or RTD. 
the fraction younger than age t, is 
whereas the fraction of material older than t,, shown as the shaded area in Fig. 
11.6, is 
The E curve is the distribution needed to account for nonideal flow. 
Experimental Methods (Nonchemical) for Finding E 
The simplest and most direct way of finding the E curve uses a physical or 
nonreactive tracer. For special purposes, however, we may want to use a reactive 
tracer. This chapter deals in detail with the nonreactive tracer, and for this all 
sorts of experiments can be used. Figure 11.7 shows some of these. Because the 
pulse and the step experiments are easier to interpret, the periodic and random 
harder, here we only consider the pulse and the step experiment. 
Periodic 
input 
Figure 11.7 Various ways of studying the flow pattern in vessels. 


=== PDF PAGE 278 ===
262 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
We next discuss these two experimental methods for finding the E curve. We 
then show how to find reactor behavior knowing the E curve for the reactor. 
The Pulse Experiment 
Let us find the E curve for a vessel of volume V m3 through which flows v m3/s 
of fluid. For this instantaneously introduce M units of tracer (kg or moles) into 
the fluid entering the vessel, and record the concentration-time of tracer leaving 
the vessel. This is the C,,,,, curve. From the material balance for the vessel we find 
Area under the 
M 
Cpulse Curve 
i 
u 
v 
= - [s] 
i 
All this is shown in Fig. 11.8. 
To find the E curve from the C,,,,, curve simply change the concentration scale 
such that the area under the curve is unity. Thus, simply divide the concentration 
readings by Mlv, as shown in Fig. 11.9. 
Cpulse 
E = -  
Mlu 
Instantaneously introduce 
M units of tracer into the 
fluid entering the vessel 
/ 
II / 
m t 
r Record the leaving traces 
. . E 3 
on 
time, s 
u ,  m3/s 
Evaluate the mean 
- 
h c d t  - xticiAti 
t=--- 
lurne 
Icdt 
BCiAti 
Figure 11.8 The useful information obtainable from the pulse 
trace experiment. 


=== PDF PAGE 279 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 263 
Figure 11.9 Transforming an experimental C,,,,, curve into an E curve. 
We have another RTD function E,. Here time is measured in terms of mean 
residence time 6 = tl?. Thus 
Egis a useful measure when dealing with flow models which come up in Chapters 
13,14, and 15. Figure 11.10 shows how to transform E into E,. 
One final reminder, the relationship between C,,,,, and the E curves only holds 
exactly for vessels with closed boundary conditions. 
The Step Experiment 
Consider u m3/s of fluid flowing through a vessel of volume V. Now at time t = 
0 switch from ordinary fluid to fluid with tracer of concentration C,, 
= 
[kg z y l ] ,  and measure the outlet tracer concentration CSkp versus t, as shown 
in Fig. 11.11. 
Figure 11.10 Transforming an E curve into an E, curve. 


=== PDF PAGE 280 ===
264 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Step input at time t = 0 
t < 0 . . . no tracer 
t > 0 ... m [kglsl of tracer, 
Cstep 
Figure 11.11 Information obtainable from a step tracer experiment. 
A material balance relates the different measured quantities of the output 
curve of a step input 
and 
mV kg.s2 
shaded area = 
- 
(ofFig.11.11) 
v2 [ m3 ] 
- 1:"" tdcstep 
t =  
= 1 
t dCstep 
I:"" dCstep 
Cmax 
where m [kgls] is the flow rate of tracer in the entering fluid. 
The dimensionless form of the CStep curve is called the F curve. It is found by 
having the tracer concentration rise from zero to unity, as shown in Fig. 11.12. 
Relationship between the F and E Curves 
To relate E with F imagine a steady flow of white fluid. Then at time t = 0 switch 
to red and record the rising concentration of red fluid in the exit stream, the F 
Figure 11.12 Transforming an experimental C,,,, curve to an F curve. 


=== PDF PAGE 281 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 255 
curve. At any time t > 0 red fluid and only red fluid in the exit stream is younger 
than age t. Thus we have 
fraction of red fluid 
fraction of exit stream 
in the exit stream ) = ( younger than age t  
But the first term is simply the F value, while the second is given by Eq. 1. So 
we have, at time t, 
F =  E d t  
I: 
(7) 
and on differentiating 
In graphical form this relationship is shown in Fig. 11.13. 
These relationships show how stimulus-response experiments, using either step 
or pulse inputs can conveniently give the RTD and mean flow rate of fluid in 
the vessel. We should remember that these relationships only hold for closed 
vessels. When this boundary condition is not met, then the Cpuls, and E curves 
differ. The Cpuls, curves of the convection model (see Chap. 15) clearly show 
this. 
Figure 11.14 shows the shapes of these curves for various types of flow. 
Figure 11.13 Relationship between the E and F 
curves. 


=== PDF PAGE 282 ===
266 
Chapter I 1  Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Mixed flow 
-+ 
t 
1 
- 
t 
t 
t 
t 
5 
10 
15 
1.5 
1 
1.0 
0.5 
1 
0 
0 
0 
t 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
Figure 11.14 Properties of the E and F curves for various flows. Curves are drawn in terms of 
ordinary and dimensionless time units. Relationship between curves is given by Eqs. 7 and 8. 
At any time these curves are related as follows: 
v 
E = - - . C  
v 
dF 
m 
pulse, 
F = -. ,i, C  
step 7 
E  = - 
dt ' 
- v 
t = -  
t
-
 
,g=- 
,g -1 
E - -  
v ' 
, 
E -  , 
0-tE 
t 
6, E,, F . . . all dimensionless, E  = [time-'] 


=== PDF PAGE 283 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 267 
FINDING THE RTD BY EXPERIMENT 
The concentration readings in Table Ell.l represent a continuous response to 
a pulse input into a closed vessel which is to be used as a chemical reactor. 
Calculate the mean residence time of fluid in the vessel t, and tabulate and plot 
the exit age distribution E. 
Table El1.1 
Tracer Output Concentration, C,,,,, 
Time t, min 
gmlliter fluid 
SOLUTION 
The mean residence time, from Eq. 4, is 
- C tiCiAti ~t = constant C tici 
t =  
c i ~ t i  
C. ci 
The area under the concentration-time curve, 
gives the total amount of tracer introduced. To find E, the area under this curve 
must be unity; hence, the concentration readings must each be divided by the 
total area, giving 
C 
E = -  
area 
Thus we have 
t, min 
C 
E = -  
min-l 
area' 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
0 
0.03 
0.05 
0.05 
0.04 
0.02 
0.01 


=== PDF PAGE 284 ===
268 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
0 . 0 5 1  
Ci 
--+ 
Smoothed 
curve 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
t, min 
Figure Ell.l 
Figure Ell.l is a plot of this distribution. 
FINDING THE E CURVE FOR LIQUID FLOWING 
THROUGH A VESSEL 
A large tank (860 liters) is used as a gas-liquid contactor. Gas bubbles up through 
the vessel and out the top, liquid flows in at one part and out the other at 5 
litersls. To get an idea of the flow pattern of liquid in this tank a pulse of tracer 
(M = 150 gm) is injected at the liquid inlet and measured at the outlet, as shown 
in Fig. E11.2a. 
(a) Is this a properly done experiment? 
(b) If so, find the liquid fraction in the vessel. 
(c) Determine the E curve for the liquid. 
(d) Qualitatively what do you think is happening in the vessel? 
* 
IU 
C-' 
.- - . 
E 
M 6 
2 
4 
6 
8 
t, min 
Figure E11.2~ 
(a) Check the material balance against the tracer curve. From the material 
balance, Eq. 3, we should have 
gm - min 
150gm = 3 0 e = 0 . 5 _  
Area = - 
= 
u 
5 litersls 
liter 
liter 


=== PDF PAGE 285 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 269 
From the tracer curve 
( 
:6 
gm . min 
Area=A, 1 +-+-+ 
- . 
=0.375 - =0.5- 
) 
( )  
liter 
These values agree. The results are consistent. 
(b) For the liquid, Eq. 4 gives 
Thus the liquid volume in the vessel is 
V, = tlv, = 2.67(5 X 60) = 800 liters 
and the volume fraction of phases is 
Fraction of liquid = - 
= 93% 
: 1 
Fraction of gas = 7% 
J 
(c) Finally, from Eq. 5 we find the E curve, or 
Cpulse - 0.75 
E = -  
- -C= 
1.5C 
Mlv 
0.5 
Thus the E curve for the liquid is as shown in Fig. E11.2b. 
(c) 
(d) The vessel has a strong recirculation of liquid, probably induced by the 
rising bubbles. 
( 4  
2 
4 
6 
t, min 
Figure E11.2b 


=== PDF PAGE 286 ===
270 
Chapter I 1  Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
The Convolution Integral 
Suppose we introduce into a vessel a one-shot tracer signal Cin versus t as shown 
in Fig. 11.15. In passing through the vessel the signal will be modified to give an 
output signal Co, versus t. Since the flow with its particular RTD is responsible 
for this modification let us relate Cin, E, and C,. 
Focus attention on tracer leaving at time about t. This is shown as the narrow 
rectangle B in Fig. 11.15. We may then write 
i 
all the tracer entering t' seconds earlier than t, 
in rectangle B 
and staying for time t' in the vessel 
We show the tracer which enters t' seconds earlier than t as the narrow rectangle 
A. In terms of this rectangle the above equation may be written 
tracer in 
fraction of tracer in A 
tracerleaving) 
( A )( 
rectangle 
which stays for about 
(in rectangle 
a11 rectangles 
A which enter 
t' seconds in the vessel 
earlier then 
time t 
In symbols and taking limits (shrinking the rectangles) we obtain the desired 
relationship, which is called the convolution integral 
In what can be shown to be equivalent form we also have 
We say that C,, 
is the convolution of E with Cin and we write concisely 
t 
, P i n  
out 
t - t '  
t 
C 
t' seconds 
earlier 
Figure 11.15 Sketch showing derivation of the convolution integral. 


=== PDF PAGE 287 ===
11.1 E, The Age Distribution of Fluid, The RTD 271 
Figure 11.16 Modification of an input tracer signal Ci, on passing through three succes- 
sive regions. 
Application of These Tools. To illustrate the uses of these mathematical tools 
consider three independent* flow units a, b, and c, which are closed and connected 
in series (see Fig. 11.16). 
Problem 1. If the input signal Ci, is measured and the exit age distribution 
functions E,, E,, and E, are known, then C1 is the convolution of E, with Cin 
and so on, thus 
and on combining 
Thus we can determine the output from a multiregion flow unit. 
Problem 2. If we measure Cin and C, and know E, and E, we can then extract the 
unknown E, . This type of problem is of particular importance in experimentation 
where the entrance region and collection region for tracer are both large com- 
pared with the experimental section. 
It is a straightforward matter to convolute; however, to deconuolute, to find 
one of the distribution functions under the integral, is difficult. Thus Problem 2 
is harder to treat than Problem 1 and requires using a computer. 
* By independence we mean that the fluid loses its memory as it passes from vessel to vessel. Thus, 
a faster-moving fluid element in one vessel does not remember this fact in the next vessel and doesn't 
preferentially flow faster (or slower) there. Laminar flow often does not satisfy this requirement of 
independence; however, complete (or lateral) mixing of fluid between units satisfies this condition. 


=== PDF PAGE 288 ===
272 
Chapter I1 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
In some cases, however, we can in essence deconvolute. This special situation 
is considered at the end of Chapter 14 and is illustrated with an example there. 
Example 11.3 illustrates convolution; Example 14.4 illustrates deconvolution. 
1 EXAMPLE 11.3 
CONVOLUTION 
Let us illustrate the use of the convolution equation, Eq. 10, with a very simple 
example in which we want to find C,,, given Ci, and the E curve for the vessel, 
as shown in Fig. E11.3a. 
I 
I 
+ 
Tracer input curve 
RTD for the vessel 
8 
Ci n 
0.4 
4 
E 
0.2 
0
 
0
1
2
3
4
 
O
 
6
7
8
9
1
0
 
t'- t 
Figure E11.3~ 
SOLUTION 
First of all, take 1 min time slices. The given data are then 
t r -  t 
Ci, 
t' 
E 
0 
0 
5 
0 
Note: The area under the 
1 
0 
6 
0.05 
E curve is unity. 
2 
8 
7 
0.50 
3 
4 
8 
0.35 
4 
6 
9 
0.10 
5 
0 
10 
0 
Now the first bit of tracer leaves at 8 min, the last bit at 13 min. Thus, applying 
the convolution integral, in discrete form, we have 


=== PDF PAGE 289 ===
11.2 Conversion in Non-Idea2 Flow' Reactors 273 
The C,,, E, and C,,, curves, in discrete and in continuous form, are shown in 
Fig. E11.3b. Note that the area under the C,,, curve equals the area under the 
Cin curve. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
t ' -  t 
t 
Figure E11.3b 
11.2 CONVERSION IN NON-IDEAL FLOW REACTORS 
To evaluate reactor behavior in general we have to know four factors: 
1. the kinetics of the reaction 
2. the RTD of fluid in the reactor 
3. the earliness or lateness of fluid mixing in the reactor 
4. whether the fluid is a micro or macro fluid 
For microfluids in plug or mixed flow we have developed the equations in the 
earlier chapters. For intermediate flow we will develop appropriate models in 
Chapters 12, 13, and 14. 
To consider the early and late mixing of a microfluid, consider the two flow 
patterns shown in Fig. 11.17 for a reactor processing a second-order reaction. In 
(a) the reactant starts at high concentration and reacts away rapidly because 
n > 1. In (b) the fluid drops immediately to a low concentration. Since the rate 
of reaction drops more rapidly than does the concentration you will end up with 
a lower conversion. Thus, for microfluids 
Early mixing favors reactions where n < 1 
For macrofluids, imagine little clumps of fluid staying for different lengths of 
time in the reactor (given by the E function). Each clump reacts away as a little 


=== PDF PAGE 290 ===
274 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Figure 11.17 This shows the latest and the earliest mixing we can have for a 
given RTD. 
batch reactor, thus fluid elements will have different compositions. So the mean 
composition in the exit stream will have to account for these two factors, the 
kinetics and the RTD. In words, then 
concentration of 
fraction of exit 
mean of concentration) 
reactant 
= tactant 
in an element 
remaining)(stream 
of 
which is ) 
of age between t 
in exit stream 
all elements 
age between t 
of exit stream 
and t + dt 
and t + dt 
In symbols this becomes 
- 
(5) 
=Jm(5) 
. E dt 
CAO at exit 
0 
CAO for an element or little 
batch of fluid of age t 
or in terms of conversions 
FA 
= Jm 0 (X~)element ' dt 
or in a form suitable for numerical integration 
intervals 
From Chapter 3 on batch reactors we have 
for first-order reactions 
for second-order reactions 
1 
for an nth-order reaction (2) 
element = [I + (n - l)C~;'kt]~~l-~ (16) 


=== PDF PAGE 291 ===
11.2 
Conversion in Non-Ideal Flow Reactors 275 
with area = 1, 
6(t - to) 
to 
Figure 11.18 The E function for 
plug flow. 
These are terms to be introduced into the performance equation, Eq. 13. Also, 
further on in this chapter we will show that for first-order reactions, the macrofluid 
equation is identical to the batch or to the microfluid equation. 
We continue this discussion in Chapter 16. 
The Dirac Delta Function, S(t - to). One E curve which may puzzle us is the 
one which represents plug flow. We call this the Dirac S function, and in symbols 
we show it as 
which says that the pulse occurs at t = to, as seen in Fig. 11.18. 
The two properties of this function which we need to know are 
Area under the curve: 
S(t - to)dt = 1 
I,' 
(18) 
Any integration 
with a S function: 
I: S(t - to)f (f)dt = f (41) 
Once we understand what this means we will see that it is easier to integrate 
with a 6 function than with any other. For example, 
I,' S(t - 5)t6dt = 5* 
('just replace to by 5) 
I: S(t - 5)t6dt = 0 
CONVERSION IN REACTORS HAVING NON-IDEAL FLOW 
The vessel of Example 11.1 is to be used as a reactor for a liquid decomposing 
with rate 


=== PDF PAGE 292 ===
276 Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Find the fraction of reactant unconverted in the real reactor and compare this 
with the fraction unconverted in a plug flow reactor of the same size. 
SOLUTION 
For the plug flow reactor with negligible density change we have 
and with r from Example 11.1 
Thus the fraction of reactant unconverted in a plug flow reactor equals 1.0%. 
For the real reactor the fraction unconverted, given by Eq. 13 for macrofluids, 
is found in Table E11.4. Hence the fraction of reactant unconverted in the 
real reactor 
Table E11.4 
t 
E 
kt 
e-kt 
e-ktE At 
5 
0.03 
1.53 
0.2154 
(0.2154)(0.03)(5) = 0.0323 
10 
0.05 
3.07 
0.0464 
0.0116 
15 
0.05 
4.60 
0.0100 
0.0025 
20 
0.04 
6.14 
0.0021 
0.0004 
25 
0.02 
7.68 
0.005 
0.0001 
30 
0.01 
9.21 
0.0001 
0 
- 
given 
-- 
'A 
- 
e-"E At = 0.0469 
'A0 
From the table we see that the unconverted material comes mostly from the 
early portion of the E curve. This suggests that channeling and short-circuiting 
can seriously hinder attempts to achieve high conversion in reactors. 
Note that since this is a first-order reaction we can treat it as a microfluid, or 
a macrofluid, whatever we wish. In this problem we solved the plug flow case 
as a microfluid, and we solved the nonideal case as a macrofluid. 


=== PDF PAGE 293 ===
11.2 Conversion in Non-Ideal Flow Reactors 277 
1 EXAMPLE 11.5 
REACTION OF A MACROFLUID 
Dispersed noncoalescing droplets (C,, = 2 mollliter) react (A -+ R, -r, = 
kc;, k = 0.5 literlmol . min) as they pass through a contactor. Find the average 
concentration of A remaining in the droplets leaving the contactor if their RTD 
is given by the curve in Fig. E11.5. 
1 
3 
t, rnin 
Figure E11.5 
Equation 13 is the pertinent performance equation. Evaluate terms in this expres- 
sion. For 
-r, = k c ; ,  
k = 0.5 literlmol . min 
I 
The batch equation from Chapter 3 is 
With E = 0.5 for 1 < t < 3, Eq. 13 becomes 
- 
C^ = 1" (5) 
E dt = f 2. 
(0.5)dt = 0.5 in 2 = 0.347 
CAO 
0 
CAO batch 
l l + t  
REFERENCE 
Danckwerts, P. V., Chem. Eng. Sci., 2, 1 (1953). 


=== PDF PAGE 294 ===
278 Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
PROBLEMS 
11.1. A pulse input to a vessel gives the results shown in Fig. P1l.l. 
(a) Check the material balance with the tracer curve to see whether the 
results are consistent. 
(b) If the result is consistent, determine t, V and sketch the E curve. 
t, min 
Figure P1l.l 
11.2. Repeat Problem P1l.l with one change: The tracer curve is now as shown 
in Fig. P11.2. 
t, min 
Figure P11.2 
11.3. A pulse input to a vessel gives the results shown in Fig. P11.3. 
(a) Are the results consistent? (Check the material balance with the 
experimental tracer curve.) 
(b) If the results are consistent, determine the amount of tracer introduced 
M, and the E curve. 
t, sec 
Figure P11.3 
11.4. A step experiment is made on a reactor. The results are shown in Fig. P11.4. 
(a) Is the material balance consistent with the tracer curve? 
(b) If so, determine the vessel volume V, 7, the F curve, and the E curve. 


=== PDF PAGE 295 ===
Problems 279 
Lv,? 
Figure P11.4 
t, rnin 
11.5. A batch of radioactive material is dumped into the Columbia River at 
Hanford, Washington. At Bonneville Dam, about 400 km downstream 
the flowing waters (6000 m3/s) are monitored for a particular radioisotope 
(t,,, > 10 yr) and the data of Fig. P11.5 are obtained. 
(a) How many units of this tracer were introduced into the river? 
(b) What is the volume of Columbia River waters between Bonneville 
Dam and the point of introduction of tracer? 
20 
35 
125 
t, days 
Figure P11.5 
11.6. A pipeline (10 cm I.D., 19.1 m long) simultaneously transports gas and 
liquid from here to there. The volumetric flow rate of gas and liquid are 
60 000 cm3/s and 300 cm3/s, respectively. Pulse tracer tests on the fluids 
flowing through the pipe give results as shown in Fig. P11.6. What fraction 
of the pipe is occupied by gas and what fraction by liquid? 
C 
2 
100 
t, sec 
Figure P11.6 


=== PDF PAGE 296 ===
280 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
A liquid macrofluid reacts according to A + R as it flows through a 
vessel. Find the conversion of A for the flow patterns of Figs. P11.7 to 
P1l.ll and kinetics as shown. 
11.7. CAo = I mollliter 
-rA = kCI5 
k = 2 m ~ l ~ . ~ l l i t e r ~  
min 
11.8. CAo = 2 mollliter 
-rA = kCi 
1 
k = 2 literlmol . min 
t, min 
0.5 
11.9. CAo = 6 mollliter 
-rA = k 
k = 3 mollliter. min 
11.11. CAo = 0.1 mollliter 
-rA = k 
k = 0.03 mollliter. min 
" .- 
L,, a 
Figures P11.7, P11.8, P11.9, P1l.lO, P1l.ll 
11.12-11.14. Hydrogen sulfide is removed form coal gas by contact with a moving 
bed of iron oxide particles which convert to the sulfide as follows: 
Fe203 -+ FeS 
In our reactor the fraction of oxide converted in any particle is determined 
by its residence time t and the time needed for complete conversion of 


=== PDF PAGE 297 ===
Problems 281 
the particle 7, and this is given by 
and 
X = 1 
when t r 1 hr 
Find the conversion of iron oxide to sulfide if the RTD of solids in the 
contactor is approximated by the curve of Fig. P11.12, P11.13, or P11.14. 
Coal 
with 
Coal gas 
without 
H2S 
Solids out 
Fe203 + FeS 
Figures P11.12, P11.13, P11.14 
11.15. Cold solids flow continuously into a fluidized bed where they disperse 
rapidly enough so that they can be taken as well mixed. They then heat 
up, they devolatilize slowly, and they leave. Devolatilization releases gas- 
eous A which then decomposes by first-order kinetics as it passes through 
the bed. When the gas leaves the bed decomposition of gaseous A stops. 
From the following information determine the fraction of gaseous A which 
has decomposed. 
Data: Since this is a large-particle fluidized bed containing cloudless 
bubbles, assume plug flow of gas through the unit. Also assume 
that the volume of gases released by the solids is small compared 
to the volume of carrier gas passing through the bed. 
Mean residence time in the bed: 
6 
= 15 min, 6 
= 2 s for carrier gas 
For the reaction: A +products, -rA = k c A ,  k = 1 s-l 


=== PDF PAGE 298 ===
282 
Chapter 11 Basics of Non-Ideal Flow 
Volatlles only react 
Figure P11.15 
11.16. Reactant A (C,, 
= 64 mol/m3) flows through a plug flow reactor ( r  = 
50 s), and reacts away as follows: 
Determine the conversion of A if the stream is: 
(a) a microfluid, 
(b) a macrofluid. 


=== PDF PAGE 299 ===
Chapter 12 
Compartment Models 
Flow models can be of different levels of sophistication and the compartment 
models of this chapter are the next stage beyond the very simplest, those that 
assume the extremes of plug flow and mixed flow. In the compartment models 
we consider the vessel and the flow through it as follows: 
I 
V,-plug 
flow region 
Total 
V,-active 
volume 
volume - - . V,-mixed 
flow region 
[v,-dead 
or stagnant region within the vessel 
v,-active 
flow, that through the plug and mixed flow regions 
Total 
throughflow . . . v,-bypass 
flow 
v 
v,-recycle 
flow 
By comparing the E curve for the real vessel with the theoretical curves for 
various combinations of compartments and throughflow, we can find which model 
best best fits the real vessel. Of course, the fit will not be perfect; however, 
models of this kind are often a reasonable approximation to the real vessel. 
Figure 12.1, on the next few pages, shows what the E curves look like for 
various combinations of the above elements-certainly not all combinations. 
Hints, Suggestions, and Possible Applications 
(a) If we know M (kilograms of tracer introduced in the pulse) we can make 
a material balance check. Remember that M = v (area of curve). However, 
if we only measure the output C on an arbitrary scale, we cannot find M 
or make this material balance check. 
283 


=== PDF PAGE 300 ===
284 
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 
Ideal pulse, height is 
Area = I 
Area = 1 h 
r Mixed 
Area = 2 
I
A
r
e
a
 1 -1 
'L 
Mixed 
Figure 12.1 Various compartment flow models. 


=== PDF PAGE 301 ===
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 285 
Area = - 
d 
'rg 
w' 
U1 1 
ove: 
= v = 
+ ' ~ 2  
t 
mean 
u  
ul +u2 
log E 
This method of plotting and 
fitting exponentials is only 
useful when 
and t2 
are very different. 
Equation is the sum of 
t 
0 
t 
2$7= 
v l + v 2  
u 1 + u 2  
Put on semilog 
scale 
Figure 12.1 (Continued) 


=== PDF PAGE 302 ===
1 
Mean of shaded 
portion of curve - 
U, 
Overall-- 
V ~ + V m  
mean - t ~ b s  
= 7 
1 
1 - 
e 
Area = - 
t 
Overall-- 
Vp+Vm 
mean - 'obs = 7 
Meanof 
V ~ + V m  
first ,oflion= '(
1 
Area = - 
t 
0 
Figure 12.1 (Continued) 


=== PDF PAGE 303 ===
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 287 
log C 
Initial slope = - -= 
log A 
A 
Slope = - - 
Equivalent - 
(log A) - 1 
A - 
e 
0 
t 
(log A) - 2 
t 
Mean of curve: i 
log C 
Slope = - - 
Figure 12.2 Properties of exponential decay tracer curves. 
(b) We must know both V and v if we want to properly evaluate all the 
elements of a model, including dead spaces. If we only measure jobs, we 
cannot find the size of these stagnant regions and must ignore them in 
our model building. Thus 
If the real vessel 
- 
- 
- 
v 
tabs < 2 
t 
= -  
has dead spaces: 
v 
. . - where 
If the real vessel 
- 
- 
vw, 
has no dead spaces: tabs = 
tabs = - 
v 
(c) The semilog plot is a convenient tool for evaluating the flow parameters 
of a mixed flow compartment. Just draw the tracer response curve on this 
plot, find the slope and intercept and this gives the quantities A, B, and 
C, as shown in Fig. 12.2. 
Diagnosing Reactor Ills 
These combined models are useful for diagnostic purposes, to pinpoint faulty 
flow and suggest causes. For example, if you expect plug flow and you know 
i = Vlv, Fig. 12.3 shows what you could find. 
If you expect mixed flow, Fig. 12.4 shows what you may find. 


=== PDF PAGE 304 ===
288 
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 
Slim trim curve means 
Early curve is a sure sign 
Multiple decaying peaks at regular 
reasonably good flow 
of stagnant backwaters 
intervals indicate strong 
internal recirculation 
Mean is too early 
C 
t 
Double peaks come from flow 
Late curve 
in parallel paths, channeling 
Late tracer is puzzling. Material balance 
says it can't happen so the only 
explanations are: 
. 
u or v are incorrectly measured 
(check flow meters, etc.) 
C 
C 
tracer is not inert (adsorbs on 
surface? Try a different one) 
the closed vessel assumption is 
far from satisfied. 
. - 
tabs 
Figure 12.3 Misbehaving plug flow reactors. 
Reasonably good flow 
Time lag means plug flow 
Slow internal circulation suggests 
in series with mixed flow 
sluggish slow turnover of fluid 
Inadequate mixing 
Draft tube effect 
C 
t 
Early curve means 
Late curve means either incorrect 
Sharp early peak 
v or V or noninert tracer 
from inlet to outlet 
C 
. 
- 
t 
t 
tabs 
Figure 12.4 Misbehaving mixed flow reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 305 ===
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 289 
BEHAVIOR OF A G/L CONTACTOR 
From the measured pulse tracer response curves (see figure), find the fraction 
of gas, of flowing liquid, and of stagnant liquid in the gas-liquid contactor shown 
in Fig. E12.1. 
20 rn 
t, sec 
t, sec 
Figure E12.1 
To find V,, V,, and V,,,,, first calculate j, and j, from the tracer curves. Thus 
from Fig. E12.1 
and 
- t1 = 40 s. 
Therefore 
V, = j,v, = (10)(0.5) = 5m3 
Vl = jlv, = 40(0.1) = 4m3 
In terms of void volume 
% stagnant = 10%) 


=== PDF PAGE 306 ===
290 
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 
At present our 6-m3 tank reactor gives 75% conversion for the first order reaction 
A-R. 
However, since the reactor is stirred with an underpowered paddle 
turbine, we suspect incomplete mixing and poor flow patterns in the vessel. A 
pulse tracer shows that this is so and gives the flow model sketched in Fig. E12.2. 
What conversion can we expect if we replace the stirrer with one powerful 
enough to ensure mixed flow? 
Deadwater 
Figure E12.2 
Let subscript 1 represent today's reactor and subscript 2 represent the cured 
reactor. At present, from Chapter 5 for the MFR, we have 
But k7, = 3 kr, = 3 X 3 = 9 
Therefore 


=== PDF PAGE 307 ===
Problems 291 
PROBLEMS 
12.1. to 12.6. A pulse of concentrated NaCl solution is introduced as tracer into 
the fluid entering a vessel (V = 1 m3, v = 1 m3/min) and the concentration of 
tracer is measured in the fluid leaving the vessel. Develop a flow model 
to represent the vessel from the tracer output data sketched in Figs. P12.1 
to P12.6. 
t. rnin 
t, min 
t, sec 
Figures P12.1 through P12.6 
t, rnin 
t, sec 
r Area = 
t, sec 
12.7. to 12.10. A step input tracer test (switching from tap water to salt water, 
measuring the conductivity of fluid leaving the vessel) is used to explore 
the flow pattern of fluid through the vessel (V = 1 m3, v = 1 m3/min). 
Devise a flow model to represent the vessel from the data of Figs. P12.7 
to P12.10. 


=== PDF PAGE 308 ===
292 
Chapter 12 Compartment Models 
t, rnin 
9 
C 
4 
40 
t, sec 
t, sec 
Figures P12.7 through P12.10 
12.11. The second order aqueous reaction A + B + R + S is run in a large tank 
reactor (V = 6 m3) and for an equimolar feed stream (C,, = C,,) conver- 
sion of reactants is 60%. Unfortunately, agitation in our reactor is rather 
inadequate and tracer tests of the flow within the reactor give the flow 
model sketched in Fig. P12.11. What size of mixed flow reactor will equal 
the performance of our present unit? 
Figure P12.11 
Figure Pl2.12 
12.12. Repeat Example 12.2 with one change: The model for the present flow 
is as shown in Fig. P12.12. 


=== PDF PAGE 309 ===
Chapter 13 
The Dispersion Model 
Choice of Models 
Models are useful for representing flow in real vessels, for scale up, and for 
diagnosing poor flow. We have different kinds of models depending on whether 
flow is close to plug, mixed, or somewhere in between. 
Chapters 13 and 14 deal primarily with small deviations from plug flow. There 
are two models for this: the dispersion model and the tanks-in-series model. Use 
the one that is comfortable for you. They are roughly equivalent. These models 
apply to turbulent flow in pipes, laminar flow in very long tubes, flow in packed 
beds, shaft kilns, long channels, screw conveyers, etc. 
For laminar flow in short tubes or laminar flow of viscous materials these 
models may not apply, and it may be that the parabolic velocity profile is the 
main cause of deviation from plug flow. We treat this situation, called the pure 
convection model, in Chapter 15. 
If you are unsure which model to use go to the chart at the beginning of 
Chapter 15. It will tell you which model should be used to represent your setup. 
13.1 AXIAL DISPERSION 
Suppose an ideal pulse of tracer is introduced into the fluid entering a vessel. 
The pulse spreads as it passes through the vessel, and to characterize the spreading 
according to this model (see Fig. 13.1), we assume a diffusion-like process super- 
imposed on plug flow. We call this dispersion or longitudinal dispersion to distin- 
guish it from molecular diffusion. The dispersion coefficient D (m2/s) represents 
this spreading process. Thus 
large D means rapid spreading of the tracer curve 
small D means slow spreading 
D = 0 means no spreading, hence plug flow 
Also 
(s) 
is the dimensionless group characterizing the spread in the whole vessel. 


=== PDF PAGE 310 ===
294 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion ,Wodel 
The pulse starts spreading and this can be 
A pulse of tracer 
caused by many things: velocity profile, 
at time t = 0 
turbulent mixing, molecular diffusion, etc. 
Symmetrical and gaussian 
Pulse input 
(8-input) 
Measurement 
point 
Figure 13.1 The spreading of tracer according to the dispersion model. 
We evaluate D or DIuL by recording the shape of the tracer curve as it passes 
the exit of the vessel. In particular, we measure 
t = mean time of passage, or when the curve passes by the exit 
v2 = variance, or a measure of the spread of the curve 
These measures, t and v2, are directly linked by theory to D and DIuL. The 
mean, for continuous or discrete data, is defined as 
The variance is defined as 
or in discrete form 
The variance represents the square of the spread of the distribution as it passes 
the vessel exit and has units of (time)2. It is particularly useful for matching 
experimental curves to one of a family of theoretical curves. Figure 13.2 illustrates 
these terms. 


=== PDF PAGE 311 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 295 
Figure 13.2 
Consider plug flow of a fluid, on top of which is superimposed some degree 
of backmixing, the magnitude of which is independent of position within the 
vessel. This condition implies that there exist no stagnant pockets and no gross 
bypassing or short-circuiting of fluid in the vessel. This is called the dispersed 
plug flow model, or simply the dispersion model. Figure 13.3 shows the conditions 
visualized. Note that with varying intensities of turbulence or intermixing the 
predictions of this model should range from plug flow at one extreme to mixed 
flow at the other. As a result the reactor volume for this model will lie between 
those calculated for plug and mixed flow. 
Since the mixing process involves a shuffling or redistribution of material either 
by slippage or eddies, and since this is repeated many, many times during the 
flow of fluid through the vessel we can consider these disturbances to be statistical 
in nature, somewhat as in molecular diffusion. For molecular diffusion in the 
x-direction the governing differential equation is given by Fick's law: 
where a, the coefficient of molecular diffusion, is a parameter which uniquely 
characterizes the process. In an analogous manner we may consider all the 
contributions to intermixing of fluid flowing in the x-direction to be described 
Flat velocity 
Plug flow 
Fluctuations due to different flow 
velocities and due to molecular 
and turbulent diffusion x 
Dispersed plug flow 
Figure 13.3 Representation of the dispersion (dispersed plug 
flow) model. 


=== PDF PAGE 312 ===
296 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
by a similar form of expression, or 
where the parameter D, which we call the longitudinal or axial dispersion coefi- 
cient, uniquely characterizes the degree of backmixing during flow. We use the 
terms longitudinal and axial because we wish to distinguish mixing in the direction 
of flow from mixing in the lateral or radial direction, which is not our primary 
concern. These two quantities may be quite different in magnitude. For example, 
in streamline flow of fluids through pipes, axial mixing is mainly due to fluid 
velocity gradients, whereas radial mixing is due to molecular diffusion alone. 
In dimensionless form where z = (ut + x)lL and I3 = tlt = tulL, the basic 
differential equation representing this dispersion model becomes 
where the dimensionless group (s), 
called the vessel dispersion number, is 
the parameter that measures the extent of axial dispersion. Thus 
D - 
+ 0 
negligible dispersion, hence plug flow 
UL 
D - 
UL+ 
large dispersion, hence mixed flow 
This model usually represents quite satisfactorily flow that deviates not too 
greatly from plug flow, thus real packed beds and tubes (long ones if flow 
is streamline). 
Fitting the Dispersion Model for Small Extents of Dispersion, DIuL < 0.01 
If we impose an idealized pulse onto the flowing fluid then dispersion modifies 
this pulse as shown in Fig. 13.1. For small extents of dispersion (if DIuL is small) 
the spreading tracer curve does not significantly change in shape as it passes the 
measuring point (during the time it is being measured). Under these conditions 
the solution to Eq. 6 is not difficult and gives the symmetrical curve of Eq. 7 
shown in Figs. 13.1 and 13.4. 
This represents a family of gaussian curves, also called error or Normal curves. 


=== PDF PAGE 313 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 297 
Shaded area = 0.68 
At this value of DIuL the 
tracer curve is becoming 
0.9 
1 .O 
1.1 
t 
V 
Figure 13.4 Relationship between DIuL and the dimensionless E, curve for small 
extents of dispersion, Eq. 7. 
The equations representing this family are 
E,=;.E= 
4DLlu 
- 
V
L
 
t E = v = u  or GE=l I 
-mean 
of E curve 
2 
cT 
- 
-
2
 
or 
Note that DIuL is the one parameter of this curve. Figure 13.4 shows a number 
of ways to evaluate this parameter from an experimental curve: by calculating 
its variance, by measuring its maximum height or its width at the point of 
inflection, or by finding that width which includes 68% of the area. 


=== PDF PAGE 314 ===
298 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Figure 13.5 Illustration of additivity of means and of variances of the E curves of vessels 
a , b , .  . . ,n. 
2 
rva r u , 2  
un 7, 
u$verall \ 
I 
I 
)' 
Atfa&.- 
Also note how the tracer spreads as it moves down the vessel. From the 
variance expression of Eq. 8 we find that 
width of tracer 
a2 K L 
or 
( 
curve 
Vessel n 
t 
Fortunately, for small extents of dispersion numerous simplifications and ap- 
proximations in the analysis of tracer curves are possible. First, the shape of the 
tracer curve is insensitive to the boundary condition imposed on the vessel, 
whether closed or open (see above Eq. 11.1). So for both closed and open vessels 
Cpulse = E and C,,,, = F. 
For a series of vessels the t and u2 of the individual vessels are additive, thus, 
referring to Fig. 13.5 we have 
... 
and 
- 
The additivity of times is expected, but the additivity of variance is not generally 
expected. This is a useful property since it allows us to subtract for the distortion 
of the measured curve caused by input lines, long measuring leads, etc. 
This additivity property of variances also allows us to treat any one-shot tracer 
input, no matter what its shape, and to extract from it the variance of the E 
curve of the vessel. So, on referring to Fig. 13.6, if we write for a one-shot input 
b 
Vessel a 
b
~
n
~
 
input 
c 
Figure 13.6 Increase in variance is the same in both cases, or u2 = a:,, - uin = Au2. 


=== PDF PAGE 315 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 299 
Aris (1959) has shown, for small extents of dispersion, that 
a2 - 2 
out 
(Tin - A(+' 
- 
(tout - tin)' 
(Aj>2 
Thus no matter what the shape of the input curve, the DIuL value for the vessel 
can be found. 
The goodness of fit for this simple treatment can only be evaluated by compari- 
son with the more exact but much more complex solutions. From such a compari- 
son we find that the maximum error in estimate of DIuL is given by 
D 
error < 5% when - 
< 0.01 
uL 
D 
Large Deviation from Plug Flow, - 
> 0.01 
UL 
Here the pulse response is broad and it passes the measurement point slowly 
enough that it changes shape-it 
spreads-as 
it is being measured. This gives a 
nonsymmetrical E curve. 
An additional complication enters the picture for large DIuL: What happens 
right at the entrance and exit of the vessel strongly affects the shape of the tracer 
curve as well as the relationship between the parameters of the curve and DIuL. 
Let us consider two types of boundary conditions: either the flow is undisturbed 
as it passes the entrance and exit boundaries (we call this the open b.c.), or you 
have plug flow outside the vessel up to the boundaries (we call this the closed 
b.c.). This leads to four combinations of boundary conditions, closed-closed, 
open-open, and mixed. Figure 13.7 illustrates the closed and open extremes, 
whose RTD curves are designated as E,, and E,,. 
Now only one boundary condition gives a tracer curve which is identical to 
the E function and which fits all the mathematics of Chapter 11, and that is the 
closed vessel. For all other boundary conditions you do not get a proper RTD. 
In all cases you can evaluate DIuL from the parameters of the tracer curves; 
however, each curve has its own mathematics. Let us look at the tracer curves 
for closed and for the open boundary conditions. 
Closed vessel 
m 
Open vessel 
D 
Plug flow, 
Same D 
D = O  
everywhere 
f -I+ 
fl --A++ 
-1- -,v 
-?-- 
--3 - 
+ 
t 
I 
t 
I 
Change in flow pattern 
Undisturbed flow at 
at boundaries 
boundaries 
Figure 13.7 Various boundary conditions used with the dispersion model. 


=== PDF PAGE 316 ===
300 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
"small deviation" 
Figure 13.8 Tracer response curves for closed vessels and large deviations 
from plug flow. 
Closed Vessel. Here an analytic expression for the E curve is not available. 
However, we can construct the curve by numerical methods, see Fig. 13.8, or 
evaluate its mean and variance exactly, as was first done by van der Laan 
(1958). Thus 
Open Vessel. This represents a convenient and commonly used experimental 
device, a section of long pipe (see Fig. 13.9). It also happens to be the only 
physical situation (besides small DIuL) where the analytical expression for the 
E curve is not too complex. The results are given by the response curves shown 


=== PDF PAGE 317 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 301 
Introduce 
I 
Measure 
A 
A squirt of tracer across the 
Measure the intensity of light 
cross section, or a flash of 
by "looking through the wall" 
radiation to light sensitive 
or measure conductivity with 
fluid, etc. 
a small probe, etc. 
Figure 13.9 The open-open vessel boundary condition. 
in Fig. 13.10, and by the following equations, first derived by Levenspiel and 
Smith (1957). 
1 
E @ , ~ ~  
= V ~ T ( D / ~ L )  
open-open -2 
vessel 
Comments 
(a) For small DIuL the curves for the different boundary conditions all ap- 
proach the "small deviation" curve of Eq. 8. At larger DIuL the curves 
differ more and more from each other. 
(b) To evaluate DIuL either match the measured tracer curve or the measured 
u2 to theory. Matching u2 is simplest, though not necessarily best; however, 
it is often used. But be sure to use the right boundary conditions. 
(c) If the flow deviates greatly from plug (DIuL large) chances are that the 
real vessel doesn't meet the assumption of the model (a lot of independent 
random fluctuations). Here it becomes questionable whether the model 
should even be used. I hesitate when DIuL > 1. 
(d) You must always ask whether the model should be used. You can always 
match u2 values, but if the shape looks wrong, as shown in the accompa- 
nying sketches, don't use this model, use some other model. 


=== PDF PAGE 318 ===
302 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Figure 13.10 Tracer response curves for "open" vessels having large deviations 
from plug flow. 
(e) For large DIuL the literature is profuse and conflicting, primarily because 
of the unstated and unclear assumptions about what is happening at the 
vessel boundaries. The treatment of end conditions is full of mathematical 
subtleties as noted above, and the additivity of variances is questionable. 
Because of all this we should be very careful in using the dispersion model 
where backmixing is large, particularly if the system is not closed. 
(f) We will not discuss the equations and curves for the open-closed or closed- 
open boundary conditions. These can be found in Levenspiel (1996). 
Step Input of Tracer 
Here the output F curve is S-shaped and is obtained by integrating the corre- 
sponding E curve. Thus at any time t or 6 
The shape of the F curve depends on DIuL and the boundary conditions for 
the vessel. Analytical expressions are not available for any of the F curves; 


=== PDF PAGE 319 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 303 
t 
8 = =  t 
Figure 13.11 Step response curves for small deviations from plug flow. 
however, their graphs can be constructed. Two typical cases are displayed below, 
in Figs. 13.11 and 13.13. 
Small Deviation from Plug Flow, DIuL < 0.01 From Eqs. 8 and 16 we can find 
the curves of Fig. 13.11, as shown. For these small deviations from plug flow we 
can find DIuL directly by plotting the experimental data on probability graph 
paper as indicated in Fig. 13.12. Example 13.2 shows in detail how this is done. 
Step Response for Large Dispersion, DIuL > 0.01. For large deviations from 
plug flow, the problem of boundary conditions must be considered, the resulting 
S-shaped response curves are not symmetrical, their equations are not available, 
and they are best analyzed by first differentiating them to give the corresponding 
C,,,,, curve. Figure 13.13 shows an example of this family of curves. 
Figure 13.12 Probability plot of a step response signal. From this we 
find DIuL directly. 


=== PDF PAGE 320 ===
304 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
e =  i 
t 
Figure 13.13 Step response curves for large deviations from plug flow in 
closed vessels. 
Comments 
(a) One direct commercial application of the step experiment is to find the 
zone of intermixing-the 
contaminated width-between 
two fluids of 
somewhat similar properties flowing one after the other in a long pipeline. 
Given DIuL we find this from the probability plot of Fig. 13.12. Design 
charts to ease the calculation are given by Levenspiel (1958a). 
(b) Should you use a pulse or step injection experiment? Sometimes one type 
of experiment is naturally more convenient for one of many reasons. In 
such a situation this question does not arise. But when you do have a 
choice, then the pulse experiment is preferred because it gives a more 
"honest" result. The reason is that the F curve integrates effects; it gives 
a smooth good-looking curve which could well hide real effects. For 
example, Fig. 13.14 shows the corresponding E and F curves for a given 
vessel. 
A 
is clearly evident. 
You can't miss it. 
E 
F 
miss this? 
t 
t 
Figure 13.14 Sensitivity of the E and F curves for the same flow. 


=== PDF PAGE 321 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 305 
[ EXAMPLE 13.1 
DluL FROM A C,,,,,, CURVE 
On the assumption that the closed vessel of Example 11.1, Chapter 11, is well 
represented by the dispersion model, calculate the vessel dispersion number 
DIuL. The C versus t tracer response of this vessel is 
SOLUTION 
Since the C curve for this vessel is broad and unsymmetrical, see Fig. 11.E1, let 
us guess that dispersion is too large to allow use of the simplification leading to 
Fig. 13.4. We thus start with the variance matching procedure of Eq. 18. The 
mean and variance of a continuous distribution measured at a finite number of 
equidistant locations is given by Eqs. 3 and 4 as 
and 
Using the original tracer concentration-time data, we find 
C c i = 3 + 5 + 5 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 2 0  
2 tici = (5 X 3) + (10 X 5) + . 
+ (30 X 1) = 300 min 
t:Ci = (25 X 3) + (100 X 5) + . 
- + (900 X 1) = 5450 min2 
Therefore 
and 


=== PDF PAGE 322 ===
306 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Now for a closed vessel Eq. 13 relates the variance to DIuL. Thus 
Ignoring the second term on the right, we have as a first approximation 
-- 
2: 0.106 
uL 
Correcting for the term ignored we find by trial and error that 
Our original guess was correct: This value of DIuL is much beyond the limit 
where the simple gaussian approximation should be used. 
D/uL FROM AN F CURVE 
von Rosenberg (1956) studied the displacement of benzene by n-butyrate in a 
38 mm diameter packed column 1219 mm long, measuring the fraction of n- 
butyrate in the exit stream by refractive index methods. When graphed, the 
fraction of n-butyrate versus time was found to be S-shaped. This is the F curve, 
and it is shown in Fig. E13.2a for von Rosenberg's run at the lowest flow rate, 
where u = 0.0067 mmls, which is about 0.5 mlday. 
Find the vessel dispersion number of this system. 
Time, (sec x 
(a) 
Figure E13.2~ From von Rosenberg (1956). 


=== PDF PAGE 323 ===
13.1 Axial Dispersion 307 
Instead of taking slopes of the F curve to give the E curve and then determining 
the spread of this curve, let us use the probability paper method. So, plotting 
the data on this paper does actually give close to a straight line, as shown in 
Fig. E13.2b. 
(b) 
Figure E13.2b From Levenspiel and Smith (1957). 
To find the variance and DIuL from a probability graph is a simple matter. 
Just follow the procedure illustrated in Fig. 13.12. Thus Fig. E13.2b shows that 
the 16th percentile point falls at t = 178 550 s 
the 84th percentile point falls at t = 187 750 s 
and this time interval represents 2u. Therefore the standard deviation is 
We need this standard deviation in dimensionless time units if we are to find 
D. Therefore 


=== PDF PAGE 324 ===
308 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Hence the variance 
and from Eq. 8 
Note that the value of DIuL is well below 0.01, justifying the use of the gaussian 
approximation to the tracer curve and this whole procedure. 
D/uL FROM A ONE-SHOT INPUT 
Find the vessel dispersion number in a fixed-bed reactor packed with 0.625-cm 
catalyst pellets. For this purpose tracer experiments are run in equipment shown 
in Fig. E13.3. 
The catalyst is laid down in a haphazard manner above a screen to a height 
of 120 cm, and fluid flows downward through this packing. A sloppy pulse of 


=== PDF PAGE 325 ===
13.2 Correlations for Axial Dispersion 309 
radioactive tracer is injected directly above the bed, and output signals are 
recorded by Geiger counters at two levels in the bed 90 cm apart. 
The following data apply to a specific experimental run. Bed voidage = 0.4, 
superficial velocity of fluid (based on an empty tube) = 1.2 cmlsec, and variances 
of output signals are found to be o: = 39 sec2 and of = 64 sec2. Find DIuL. 
SOLUTION 
Bischoff and Levenspiel (1962) have shown that as long as the measurements 
are taken at least two or three particle diameters into the bed, then the open 
vessel boundary conditions hold closely. This is the case here because the mea- 
surements are made 15 cm into the bed. As a result this experiment corresponds 
to a one-shot input to an open vessel for which Eq. 12 holds. Thus 
I 
or in dimensionless form 
1.2 cmlsec 
- 1 
Ao; = Ao2 (b)2 = (25 sec2) [ 
] - - 
(90 cm)(0.4) 
36 
I 
from which the dispersion number is 
13.2 CORRELATIONS FOR AXIAL DISPERSION 
The vessel dispersion number DIuL is a product of two terms 
D 
intensity of 
geometric 
D 
d 
z= 
(dispersion) ( factor ) = (2) (z) 
where 
fluid ) ( flow ) = 
properties 
dynamics 
no. 
and where 
d is a characteristic length = d,,,, or d, 
Experiments show that the dispersion model well represents flow in packed 
beds and in pipes. Thus theory and experiment give Dlud for these vessels. We 
summarize them in the next three charts. 


=== PDF PAGE 326 ===
310 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Figure 13.15 Correlation for the dispersion of fluids flowing in pipes, adapted from Levenspiel 
(1958b). 
Figures 13.15 and 13.16 show the findings for flow in pipes. This model repre- 
sents turbulent flow, but only represents streamline flow in pipes when the pipe 
is long enough to achieve radial uniformity of a pulse of tracer. For liquids this 
may require a rather long pipe, and Fig. 13.16 shows these results. Note that 
molecular diffusion strongly affects the rate of dispersion in laminar flow. At 
low flow rate it promotes dispersion; at higher flow rate it has the opposite effect. 
Correlations similar to these are available or can be obtained for flow in 
beds of porous and/or adsorbing solids, in coiled tubes, in flexible channels, for 
pulsating flow, for non-Newtonians, and so on. These are given in Chapter 64 
of Levenspiel (1996). 
Figure 13.17 shows the findings for packed beds. 


=== PDF PAGE 327 ===
13.2 Correlations for Axial Dispersion 311 
Bodenstein no.: (Re)(Sc) = * 1 = 5 
I*. PB 9 
Figure 13.16 Correlation for dispersion for streamline flow in pipes; prepared from Taylor 
(1953, 1954a) and Aris (1956). 
Figure 13.17 Experimental findings on dispersion of fluids flowing with mean axial 
velocity u in packed beds; prepared in part from Bischoff (1961). 


=== PDF PAGE 328 ===
312 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
13.3 CHEMICAL REACTION AND DISPERSION 
Our discussion has led to the measure of dispersion by a dimensionless group 
DIuL. Let us now see how this affects conversion in reactors. 
Consider a steady-flow chemical reactor of length L through which fluid is 
flowing at a constant velocity u, and in which material is mixing axially with a 
dispersion coefficient D. Let an nth-order reaction be occurring. 
A * products, 
-rA = kC2 
By referring to an elementary section of reactor as shown in Fig. 13.18, the 
basic material balance for any reaction component 
input = output + disappearance by reaction + accumulation 
(4.1) 
becomes for component A, at steady state, 
disappearance 
(Out-in)b~lkfl~~ 
+ (Out-in)axialdispersion + by reaction + accumulation = o 
The individual terms (in moles Altime) are as follows: 
(moles A) ( flow ) (cross-sectional 
entering by bulk flow = - 
volume 
velocity 
area 
= CA,,uS, [molls] 
leaving by bulk flow = CAJt~,uS 
entering by axial dispersion = dt 
Cross-sectional 
area = S 
/ 
Accurndation of A 
Disappearance 
(= 0, for steady state) 
of A 
Figure 13.18 Variables for a closed vessel in 
which reaction and dispersion are occurring. 


=== PDF PAGE 329 ===
13.3 Chemical Reaction and Dispersion 313 
d N ~  
= - (DS %) 
leaving by axial dispersion = - 
dt 
[+PI 
disappearance by reaction = (-r,) V = (-rA)S Al, 
[molls] 
Note that the difference between this material balance and that for the ideal 
plug flow reactors of Chapter 5 is the inclusion of the two dispersion terms, 
because material enters and leaves the differential section not only by bulk flow 
but by dispersion as well. Entering all these terms into Eq. 17 and dividing by 
S A1 gives 
Now the basic limiting process of calculus states that for any quantity Q which 
is a smooth continuous function of 1 
So taking limits as A1 + 0 we obtain 
In dimensionless form where z = l/L and r = t = Llu = Vlv, this expression be- 
comes 
or in terms of fractional conversion 
This expression shows that the fractional conversion of reactant A in its passage 
through the reactor is governed by three dimensionless groups: a reaction rate 
group kr C;il, the dispersion group DIuL, and the reaction order n. 
First-Order Reaction. Equation 18 has been solved analytically by Wehner and 
Wilhelm (1956) for first-order reactions. For vessels with any kind of entrance 


=== PDF PAGE 330 ===
314 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
Figure 13.19 Comparison of real and plug flow reactors for the first-order 
A + products, assuming negligible expansion; from Levenspiel and Bischoff 
(1959, 1961). 
and exit conditions the solution is 
where 
Figure 13.19 is a graphical representation of these results in useful form, 
prepared by combining Eq. 19 and Eq. 5.17, and allows comparison of reactor 
sizes for plug and dispersed plug flow. 
For small deviations from plug flow DIuL becomes small, the E curve ap- 
proaches gaussian; hence, on expanding the exponentials and dropping higher 
order terms Eq. 19 reduces to 
" It should be noted that Eq. 21 applies to any gaussian RTD with variance u2. 


=== PDF PAGE 331 ===
13.3 Chemical Reaction and Dispersion 315 
Equation 20 with Eq. 5.17 compares the performance of real reactors which are 
close to plug flow with plug flow reactors. Thus the size ratio needed for identical 
conversion is given by 
---- 
D 
- - 1 + ( k 3  - for same C,., 
LP 
VP 
uL 
while the exit concentration ratio for identical reactor size is given by 
-- 
D 
- 1 + ( k ~ ) ~  
- for same V or r  
CAP 
uL 
nth-Order Reactions. Figure 13.20 is the graphical representation of the solu- 
tion of Eq. 18 for second-order reactions in closed vessels. It is used in a manner 
similar to the chart for first-order reactions. To estimate reactor performance for 
reactions of order different from one and two we may extrapolate or interpolate 
between Figs. 13.19 and 13.20. 
Figure 13.20 Comparison of real and plug flow reactors for the second- 
order reactions 
A + B -t products, C,, = C,, 
or. . . 
2A -+ products 
assuming negligible expansion; from Levenspiel and Bischoff (1959,1961). 


=== PDF PAGE 332 ===
316 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
CONVERSION FROM THE DISPERSION MODEL 
two methods and comment. 
Matching the experimentally found variance with that of the dispersion model, 
we find from Example 13.1 
D - 
= 0.12 
uL 
Conversion in the real reactor is found from Fig. 13.19. Thus moving along the 
kr = (0.307)(15) = 4.6 line from CICo = 0.01 to DIuL = 0.12, we find that the 
fraction of reactant unconverted is approximately 
- - 
- 0.035, 
or 
35% 
Co 
- 
Comments. Figure E13.4 shows that except for a long tail the dispersion model 
curve has for the most part a greater central tendency than the actual curve. On 
the other hand, the actual curve has more short-lived material leaving the vessel. 
Both curves have the sarnev2 
Relatively large 
contribution to 
variance of the 
Figure E13.4 
Because this contributes most to the reactant remaining unconverted, the finding 


=== PDF PAGE 333 ===
Problems 317 
Extensions 
Levenspiel (1996) Chapter 64 discusses and presents performance equations for 
various extensions to this treatment. A much more detailed exposition of this 
subject is given by Westerterp et al. (1984) Chapter 4. 
REFERENCES 
Aris, R., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A235, 67 (1956). 
Aris, R., Chem. Eng. Sci., 9, 266 (1959). 
Bischoff, K. B., Ph.D. Thesis, Chemical Engineering Department, Illinois Institute of 
Technology (1961). 
Bischoff, K. B., and Levenspiel, O., Chem. Eng. Sci., 17, 245 (1962). 
Levenspiel, O., Petroleum Refiner, March (1958a). 
Levenspiel, O., Ind. Eng. Chern., 50, 343 (1958b). 
Levenspiel, O., The Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Chap. 64, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, 
OR 97339,1996. 
Levenspiel, O., and Bischoff, K. B., Ind. Eng. Chem., 51,1431 (1959); 53,313 (1961). 
Levenspiel, O., and Smith, W. K., Chem. Eng. Sci., 6,227 (1957). 
Taylor, G. I., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), 219A, 186 (1953); 2254,473 (1954). 
van der Laan, E. T., Chem. Eng. Sci., 7, 187 (1958). 
von Rosenberg, D. U., AIChE J., 2, 55 (1956). 
Wehner, J. F., and Wilhelm, R. H., Chem. Eng. Sci., 6, 89 (1956). 
Westerterp, K. R., van Swaaij, W. P. M., and Beenackers, A. A. C. M., Chemical Reactor 
Design and Operations, John Wiley, New York 1984. 
PROBLEMS 
13.1. The flow pattern of gas through blast furnaces was studied by VDEh (Veren 
Deutscher Eisenhiittenleute Betriebsforschungsinstitut) by injecting Kr-85 
into the air stream entering the tuyeres of the 688 m3 furnace. A sketch 
and listing of pertinent quantities for run 10.5 of 9.12.1969 is shown in Fig. 
P13.1. Assuming that the axial dispersion model applies to the flow of gas 
Iron ore 
zP=,,rn,\ 
~ = ~ E F r n r n  
Width of 
curve at 61% 
Figure P13.1 


=== PDF PAGE 334 ===
318 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
in the blast furnace, compare Dlud for the middle section of the blast 
furnace with that expected in an ordinary packed bed. 
From Standish and Polthier, Blast Furnace Aerodynamics, p. 99, N. 
Standish, ed., Australian I. M. M. Symp., Wollongong, 1975. 
13.2. Denmark's longest and greatest river, the Gudenaa, certainly deserves 
study, so pulse tracer tests were run on various stretches of the river using 
radioactive Br-82. Find the axial dispersion coefficient in the upper stretch 
of the river, between Torring and Udlum, 8.7 km apart, from the following 
reported measurements. 
C, arbitrary 
C, arbitrary 
440 
250 
122 
5 1 
20 
9 
3 
0 
Data from Danish Isotope Center, report of November 1976. 
13.3. RTD studies were carried out by Jagadeesh and Satyanarayana (IECIPDD 
11 520, 1972) in a tubular reactor (L = 1.21 m, 35 mm ID). A squirt of 
NaCl solution (5 N) was rapidly injected at the reactor entrance, and 
mixing cup measurements were taken at the exit. From the following results 
calculate the vessel dispersion number; also the fraction of reactor volume 
taken up by the baffles. 
t, sec 
NaCl in sample 
13.4. A pulse of radioactive Ba-140 was injected into a 10-in. pipeline (25.5 cm 
ID) 293 km long used for pumping petroleum products (u = 81.7 cmls, 
Re = 24 000) from Rangely, Colorado to Salt Lake City, Utah. Estimate 
the time of passage of fluid having more than 112 C,, 
of tracer and compare 
the value you calculate with the reported time of passage of 895 sec averaged 
over five runs. From the table of values for the gaussian distribution C > 
C,,12 
occurs between 4 t- 1.18 (T,. This may be helpful information. Data 
from Hull and Kent, Ind. Eng. Chem., 44,2745 (1952). 


=== PDF PAGE 335 ===
Problems 319 
13.5. An injected slug of tracer material flows with its carrier fluid down a long, 
straight pipe in dispersed plug flow. At point A in the pipe the spread of 
tracer is 16 m. At point B, 1 kilometer downstream from A, its spread is 
32 m. What do you estimate its spread to be at a point C, which is 2 
kilometers downstream from point A? 
13.6. A refinery pumps products A and B successively to receiving stations up 
to 100 km away through a 10-cm ID pipeline. The average properties of 
A and B are p = 850 kg/m3, p = 1.7 X 
kglm-s, !3 = 
m2/s, the 
fluid flows at u = 20 cmls, and there are no reservoirs, holding tanks or 
pipe loops in the line; just a few bends. Estimate the 16%-84% contaminated 
width 100 km downstream. Adapted from Petroleum Refiner, 37, 191 
(March 1958); Pipe Line Industry, pg. 51 (May 1958). 
13.7. Kerosene and gasoline are pumped successively at 1.1 m/s through a 25.5- 
cm ID pipeline 1000 km long. Calculate the 5195%-9515% contaminated 
width at the exit of the pipe given that the kinematic viscosity for the 501 
50% mixture is 
(Data and problem from Sjenitzer, Pipeline Engineer, December 1958). 
13.8. Water is drawn from a lake, flows through a pump and passes down a long 
pipe in turbulent flow. A slug of tracer (not an ideal pulse input) enters 
the intake line at the lake, and is recorded downstream at two locations 
in the pipe L meters apart. The mean residence time of fluid between 
recording points is 100 sec, and variance of the two recorded signals is 
What would be the spread of an ideal pulse response for a section of this 
pipe, free from end effects and of length L/5? 
13.9. Last autumn our office received complaints of a large fish kill along the 
Ohio River, indicating that someone had discharged highly toxic material 
into the river. Our water monitoring stations at Cincinnati and Portsmouth, 
Ohio (119 miles apart) report that a large slug of phenol is moving down 
the river and we strongly suspect that this is the cause of the pollution. 
The slug took 9 hours to pass the Portsmouth monitoring station, and its 
concentration peaked at 8:00 A.M. Monday. About 24 hours later the slug 
peaked at Cincinnati, taking 12 hours to pass this monitoring station. 
Phenol is used at a number of locations on the Ohio River, and their 
distance upriver from Cincinnati are as follows: 
Ashland, KY-150 
miles upstream 
Marietta, OH-303 
Huntington, WV-168 
Wheeling, WV-385 
Pomeroy, OH-222 
Steubenville, OH-425 
Parkersburg, WV-290 
Pittsburgh, PA-500 
What can you say about the probable pollution source? 


=== PDF PAGE 336 ===
320 
Chapter 13 The Dispersion Model 
13.10. A 12-m length of pipe is packed with 1 m of 2-mm material, 9 m of 1-cm 
material, and 2 m of 4-mm material. Estimate the variance in the output 
C curve for a pulse input into this packed bed if the fluid takes 2 min to 
flow through the bed. Assume a constant bed voidage and a constant 
intensity of dispersion given by Dlud, = 2. 
13.11. The kinetics of a homogeneous liquid reaction are studied in a flow reactor, 
and to approximate plug flow the 48-cm long reactor is packed with 5- 
mm nonporous pellets. If the conversion is 99% for a mean residence time 
of 1 sec, calculate the rate constant for the first-order reaction 
(a) assuming that the liquid passes in plug flow through the reactor 
(b) accounting for the deviation of the actual flow from plug flow 
(c) What is the error in calculated k if deviation from plug flow is not con- 
sidered? 
Data: Bed voidage E = 0.4 
Particle Reynolds number Re, = 200 
13.12. Tubular reactors for thermal cracking are designed on the assumption of 
plug flow. On the suspicion that nonideal flow may be an important factor 
now being ignored, let us make a rough estimate of its role. For this 
assume isothermal operations in a 2.5-cm ID tubular reactor, using a 
Reynolds number of 10 000 for flowing fluid. The cracking reaction is 
approximately first order. If calculations show that 99% decomposition 
can be obtained in a plug flow reactor 3 m long, how much longer must 
the real reactor be if nonideal flow is taken into account? 
13.13. Calculations show that a plug flow reactor would give 99.9% conversion 
of reactant which is in aqueous solution. However, our rector has an RTD 
somewhat as shown in Fig. P13.13. If C,, 
= 1000, what outlet concentration 
can we expect in our reactor if reaction is first order? From mechanics 
a2 = a2/24 for a symmetrical triangle with base a, rotating about its center 
of gravity. 
from mechanics 
+a+ 
Figure P13.13 


=== PDF PAGE 337 ===
Chapter 14 
The Tanks-In-Series Model 
This model can be used whenever the dispersion model is used; and for not too 
large a deviation from plug flow both models give identical results, for all practical 
purposes. Which model you use depends on your mood and taste. 
The dispersion model has the advantage in that all correlations for flow in 
real reactors invariably use that model. On the other hand the tanks-in-series 
model is simple, can be used with any kinetics, and it can be extended without 
too much difficulty to any arrangement of compartments, with or without recycle. 
14.1 PULSE RESPONSE EXPERIMENTS AND THE RTD 
Figure 14.1 shows the system we are considering. We also define 
t 
0; = = = dimensionless time based on the mean residence time per tank 2; 
ti 
t 
6 = = = dimensionless time based on the mean residence time in all N tanks, 7. 
t 
Then 
- 
Oi=N6 ... and ... 6,=1, 3=1 
and at any particular time, from Eq. 11 in Chapter 11 
For the first tank. Consider a steady flow v m3/s of fluid into and out of the 
first of these ideal mixed flow units of volume V,. At time t = 0 inject a pulse 
of tracer into the vessel which when evenly distributed in the vessel (and it is) 
has a concentration C,, . 
At any time t after the tracer is introduced make a material balance, thus 
rate of disappearance 
input 
output 
of tracer 
) = ( rate ) - ( rate ) 


=== PDF PAGE 338 ===
322 Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
Exit tracer curve, 
the RTD, the E function 
= mean timeltanks 
i= N $  = mean time for all N tanks 
Figure 14.1 The tanks-in-series model. 
In symbols this expression becomes 
dC1 
mol tracer 
vl-=o-uc, 
dt 
where C1 is the concentration of tracer in tank "1." Separating and integrating 
then gives 
Since the area under this CIC, versus t curve is i1 (check this if you wish) it 
allows you to find the E curve; so one may write 
For the second tank where C1 enters, C2 leaves, a material balance gives 
Separating gives a first-order differential equation, which when integrated gives 
For the Nth tank. Integration for the 3rd, 4th, . . . , Nth tank becomes more 
complicated so it is simpler to do all of this by Laplace transforms. 


=== PDF PAGE 339 ===
14.1 Pulse Response Experiments and the RTD 323 
The RTD's, means and variances, both in time and dimensionless time were 
first derived by MacMullin and Weber (1935) and are summarized by Eq. 3. 
N-1 
-2 
7. = (-&) 
NN 
e-tNli 
. . . 7 = NZ, . . . g2 = L 
(N - I)! 
N 
N-1 
e-"it 
. . . 
- 
- 
t 
t. = -. . . (
,
2
 
= N t ;  
(N - I)! 
l
N
 
- 
E,=tiE= 
. . . (.ZL 
0. - 
- N 
E@ = (NQ E = N 
1 
e-NR.. . @2 - - 
( N -  I)! 
@ - N  
Graphically these equations are shown in Fig. 14.2. The properties of the RTD 
curves are sketched in Fig. 14.3. 
~ = r = t  
% . = A  
N t i  
t 
I 
ti 
Figure 14.2 RTD curves for the tanks-in-series model, Eq. 3. 


=== PDF PAGE 340 ===
324 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
e 
Figure 14.3 Properties of the RTD curve for the tanks-in-series model. 
Comments and Extensions 
1ndependence.l If M tanks are connected to N more tanks (all of the same size) 
then the individual means and variances (in ordinary time units) are additive, or 
- 
- 
%+, = tM + t,. . . 
and 
. . . CT~,,, 
= a% + a$ 
(4) 
Because of this property we can join incoming streams with recycle streams. 
Thus this model becomes useful for treating recirculating systems. 
One-shot Tracer Input. If we introduce any one-shot tracer input into N tanks, 
as shown in Fig. 14.4, then from Eqs. 3 and 4 we can write 
Because of the independence of stages it is easy to evaluate what happens to 
the C curve when tanks are added or subtracted. Thus this model becomes useful 
in treating recycle flow and closed recirculation systems. Let us briefly look at 
these applications. 
By independence we mean that the fluid loses its memory as it passes from vessel to vessel. Thus 
a faster moving fluid element in one vessel does not remember this fact in the next vessel and doesn't 
preferentially flow faster (or slower) there. Laminar flow often does not satisfy this requirement of 
independence; however, complete (or lateral) mixing of fluid between units satisfies this condition. 


=== PDF PAGE 341 ===
14.1 Pulse Response Experiments and the RTD 325 
Model for vessel 
............................. 
... 
I----------------------------J 
Figure 14.4 For any one-shot tracer input Eq. 4 relates input, output, and number of tanks. 
Closed Recirculation System. If we introduce a 6 signal into an N stage system, 
as shown in Fig. 14.5, the recorder will measure tracer as it flows by the first 
time, the second time, and so on. In other words it measures tracer which has 
passed through N tanks, 2N tanks, and so on. In fact it measures the superposition 
of all these signals. 
To obtain the output signal for these systems simply sum up the contributions 
from the first, second, and succeeding passes. If m is the number of passes, we 
then have from Eq. 3 
- 
(tlTi)rnN-l 
iiCpulse 
= e-titi ' 
(mN - I)! 
m=l 
0yN-1 
CQ~, 
pulse = e-oi 2 
rn=l (mN - I)! 
- (N6)rnN-I 
CBpulse = Ne-NQ C 
m=l (mN - I)! 
Figure 14.5 shows the resulting C curve. As an example of the expanded form 
of Eq. 5 we have for five tanks in series 
where the terms in brackets represent the tracer signal from the first, second, 
and successive passes. 
Recirculation systems can be represented equally well by the dispersion model 
[see van der Vusse (1962), Voncken et al. (1964), and Harrell and Perona (1968)l. 
Which approach one takes simply is a matter of taste, style, and mood. 


=== PDF PAGE 342 ===
326 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
8-input signal 
Output signal 
' 
N tanks, 1 pass (Eq. 3) 
N tanks, 2nd pass 
- 
I 
1
2
3
4
 = e 
Figure 14.5 Tracer signal in a recirculating system. 
Recirculation with Throughflow. For relatively rapid recirculation compared 
to throughflow, the system as a whole acts as one large stirred tank; hence, 
the observed tracer signal is simply the superposition of the recirculation 
pattern and the exponential decay of an ideal stirred tank. This is shown in 
Fig. 14.6 where C, is the concentration of tracer if it is evenly distributed in 
the system. 
This form of curve is encountered in closed recirculation systems in which 
tracer is broken down and removed by a first-order process, or in systems using 
ut 
T . E , ~  
Model, mean time = i  
co 
t 
Figure 14.6 Recirculation with slow throughflow. 


=== PDF PAGE 343 ===
14.1 Pulse Response Experiments and the RTD 327 
radioactive tracer. Drug injection on living organisms give this sort of superposi- 
tion because the drug is constantly being eliminated by the organism. 
Step Response Experiments and the F Curve The output F curve from a series 
of N ideal stirred tanks is, in its various forms, given by Eq. 8. 
1 + N O +  W2 
+ ... +(W 
+ ..I 
2! 
(N - I)! 
I 
I 
Number 
of tanks 
= 
ForN=3 
For N tanks 
This is shown in graphical form in Fig. 14.7. 
Figure 14.7 The F curve for the tanks-in-series model, from MacMullin and 
Weber (1935). 


=== PDF PAGE 344 ===
328 Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
14.2 CHEMICAL CONVERSION 
First-Order Reaction 
Chapter 6 develops the conversion equation. Thus for first-order reactions in 
one tank 
for N tanks in series 
A comparison with plug flow performance is given in Fig. 6.5. 
For small deviations from plug flow (large N )  comparison with plug flow gives 
for same CA ,,,,: 
(k?)2 
c ~ , ~ t a n k s  - 
; 
for same volume V: - 
- 
c~~ 
2N 
These equations apply to both micro- and macrofluids. 
Second-Order Reaction of a Microfluid, A + R or A + B + R with C,, = C,, 
For a microfluid flowing through N tanks in series Eq. 6.8 gives 
and Fig. 6.6 compares the performance to that for plug flow. 
All Other Reaction Kinetics of Microfluids 
Either solve the mixed flow equation for tank after tank 
a rather tedious process, but no problem today with our handy slave, the com- 
puter. Or else we could use the graphical procedure shown in Fig. 14.8. 


=== PDF PAGE 345 ===
14.2 Chemical Conversion 329 
Parallel lines for 
-'A 
c ~ 4  
c ~ 3  c ~ 2  c ~ l  
Figure 14.8 Graphical method of evaluating the performance 
of N tanks in series for any kinetics. 
Chemical Conversion of Macrofluids 
There is rare use for macrofluid equations for homogeneous reactions. However, 
if you do need them combine Eq. 11.3 with Eq. 3 for N tanks in series, to give 
These equations may not be of practical use for homogeneous systems; however, 
they are of primary importance for heterogeneous systems, especially for GIs 
systems. 
MODIFICATIONS TO A WINERY 
A small diameter pipe 32 m long runs from the fermentation room of a winery 
to the bottle filling cellar. Sometimes red wine is pumped through the pipe, 
sometimes white, and whenever the switch is made from one to the other a 
small amount of "house blend" rosC is produced (8 bottles). Because of some 
construction in the winery the pipeline length will have to be increased to 50 m. 
For the same flow rate of wine, how many bottles of rosC may we now expect 
to get each time we switch the flow? 
Figure E14.1 sketches the problem. Let the number of bottles, the spread, be 
related to a. 
Original: 
Ll=32m a , = 8  a I = 6 4  
Longer pipe: 
L, = 50 m a, = ? 
(T; = ? 


=== PDF PAGE 346 ===
330 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
Eight bottles 
How many bottles? 
Figure E14.1 
But for small deviations from plug flow, from Eq. 3 a2 oc N or a2 L. 
:. a, = 10. . . or we can expect 10 bottles of vin rosC 
A FABLE ON RIVER POLLUTION 
Last spring our office received complaints of a large fish kill along the Ohio 
River, indicating that someone had discharged highly toxic material into the 
river. Our water monitoring stations at Cincinnati and Portsmouth, Ohio (119 
miles apart), report that a large slug of phenol is moving down the river, and 
we strongly suspect that this is the cause of the pollution. The slug took about 
10.5 hours to pass the Portsmouth monitoring station, and its concentration 
peaked at 8:00 A.M. Monday. About 26 hours later the slug peaked at Cincinnati, 
taking 14 hours to pass this monitoring station. 
Phenol is used at a number of locations on the Ohio River, and their distance 
upriver from Cincinnati are as follows: 
Ashland, KY-150 
miles upstream 
Marietta, OH-303 
Huntington, WV-168 
Wheeling, WV-385 
Pomeroy, OH-222 
Steubenville, OH-425 
Parkersburg, WV-290 
Pittsburgh, PA-500 
What can you say about the probable pollution source? 
SOLUTION 
Let us first sketch what is known, as shown in Fig. E14.2. To start, assume that 
a perfect pulse is injected. Then according to any reasonable flow model, either 


=== PDF PAGE 347 ===
14.2 Chemical Conversion 331 
I 
- 
119 miles 
L miles 
Figure E14.2 
dispersion or tanks-in-series, we have 
distance from 
~ f r a c e r  
curve CC point of origin 
spread of 
distance from 
( curve ) a J 
origin 
:. from Cincinnati: 
14 = k L1" 
:. from Portsmouth: 
10.5 = k(L - 119)la 
Dividing one by the other gives 
14 
L 
. . . from which L = 272 moles 
Comment. Since the dumping of the toxic phenol may not have occurred instan- 
taneously, any location where L 5 272 miles is suspect, or 
Ashland 1 
Huntington } t 
Pomeroy 1 
This solution assumes that different stretches of the Ohio River have the same 
flow and dispersion characteristics (reasonable), and that no suspect tributary 
joins the Ohio within 272 miles of Cincinnati. This is a poor assumption . . . 
check a map for the location of Charleston, WV, on the Kanawah River. 


=== PDF PAGE 348 ===
332 Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
B
M
 
4 
FLOW MODELS FROM RTD CURVES 
1 : 
, * -  
Let us develop a tanks-in-series model to fit the RTD shown in Fig. E14.3~. 
(a) 
Figure E14.3~ 
1 SOLUTION 
As a first approximation, assume that all the tracer curves are ideal pulses. We 
will later relax this assumption. Next notice that the first pulse appears early. 
This suggests a model as shown in Fig. E14.3b, where v = 1 and V, + V, + 
V, = 1. In Chapter 12 we see the characteristics of this model, so let us fit it. 
Also it should be mentioned that we have a number of approaches. Here is one: 
* Look at the ratio of areas of the first two peaks 
From the location of the first peak 
Vl 
- 
- Vl 
- 1 
. . . 
(R + 1)u 
(1 + 1) 
6 
* From the time between peaks 
Since V, + V, add up to 1, there is no dead volume, so at this point our model 
reduces to Fig. E14.3~. Now relax the plug flow assumption and adopt the 
tanks-in-series model. From Fig. 14.3 
I 
So our model finally is shown in Fig. E14.3d. 


=== PDF PAGE 349 ===
14.2 
Chemical Corzversion 333 
Figure E14.3b and c 
Figure E14.3d 
Bypassing the Complex Process of Deconvolution 
Suppose we measure the sloppy input and output tracer curves for a process 
vessel for the purpose of studying the flow through the vessel, thus to find the 
E curve for the vessel. In general this requires deconvolution (see Chapter 11); 
however, if we have a flow model in mind whose parameter has a one-to-one 
relationship with its variance, then we can use a very simple shortcut to find the 
E curve for the vessel. 
Example 14.4 illustrates this method. 
FINDING THE VESSEL E CURVE USING A SLOPPY 
TRACER INPUT 
I 
Given Ci, and C,,, as well as the location and spread of these tracer curves, as 
shown in Fig. E14.4~ estimate the vessel E curve. We suspect that the tanks-in- 
series model reasonably represents the flow in the vessel. 
I 
From Fig. E14.4a we have, for the vessel, 


=== PDF PAGE 350 ===
334 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
C,, with '= 220s 
, 
u2 = 1oos2 
Find the E curve for 
the vessel 
(a) 
Figure E14.4a 
Equation 3 represents the tanks-in-series model and gives 
So from Eq. 3a, for N tanks-in-series we have 
and for N = 4 
Figure E14.4b shows the shape of this E curve. 
t, S 
(6) 
Figure E14.4b 


=== PDF PAGE 351 ===
Problems 335 
REFERENCES 
Harrell, J. E., Jr., and Perona, J. J., Znd. Eng. Chem. Process Design Develop., 7,464 (1968). 
MacMullin, R. B., and Weber, M., Jr., Trans. AIChE, 31, 409 (1935). 
van der Vusse, J. G., Chem. Eng. Sci., 17, 507 (1962). 
Vonken, R. M., Holmes, D. B., and den Hartog, H. W., Chem. Eng. Sci., 19,209 (1964). 
PROBLEMS 
14.1. Fit the tanks-in-series model to the following mixing cup output data to 
a pulse input. 
14.2. Fluid flows at a steady rate through ten well-behaved tanks in series. A 
pulse of tracer is introduced into the first tank, and at the time this tracer 
leaves the system 
maximum concentration = 100 mmol 
tracer spread = 1 min 
If ten more tanks are connected in series with the original ten tanks, what 
would be 
(a) the maximum concentration of leaving tracer? 
(b) the tracer spread? 
(c) How does the relative spread change with number of tanks? 
14.3. From the New York Times Magazine, December 25,1955, we read: "The 
United States Treasury reported that it costs eight-tenths of a cent to 
print dollar bills, and that of the billion and a quarter now in circulation, 
a billion have to be replaced annually." Assume that the bills are put into 
circulation at a constant rate and continuously, and that they are with- 
drawn from circulation without regard to their condition, in a random 
manner. 
Suppose that a new series of dollar bills is put in circulation at a given 
instant in place of the original bills. 
(a) How many new bills will be in circulation at any time? 
(b) 21 years later, how many old bills will still be in circulation? 
14.4. Referring to the previous problem, suppose that during a working day a 
gang of counterfeiters put into circulation one million dollars in fake one- 
dollar bills. 
(a) If not detected, what will be the number in circulation as a function 
of time? 
(b) After 10 years, how many of these bills would still be in circulation? 


=== PDF PAGE 352 ===
336 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
14.5. Repeat Problem 13.13, but solve it using the tanks-in-series model instead 
of the dispersion model. 
14.6. A stream of fully suspended fine solids (v = 1 m3/min) passes through 
two mixed flow reactors in series, each containing 1 m3 of slurry. As soon 
as a particle enters the reactors, conversion to product begins and is 
complete after two minutes in the reactors. When a particle leaves the 
reactors, reaction stops. What fraction of particles is completely converted 
to product in this system? 
14.7. Fit the RTD of Fig. P14.7 with the tanks-in-series model. 
Figure P14.7 
14.8. From a pulse input into a vessel we obtain the following output signal 
We want to represent the flow through the vessel with the tanks-in-series 
model. Determine the number of tanks to use. 
Time,min 
Concentration 
(arbitrary) 
14.9. Strongly radioactive waste fluids are stored in "safe-tanks7' which are 
simply long, small-diameter (e.g., 20 m by 10 cm) slightly sloping pipes. 
To avoid sedimentation and development of "hot spots," and also to 
insure uniformity before sampling the contents, fluid is recirculated in 
these pipes. 
To model the flow in these tanks, a pulse of tracer is introduced and 
the curve of Fig. P14.9 is recorded. Develop a suitable model for this 
system and evaluate the parameters. 
1 3 
5 
7 
9 
11 13 15 
0 
0 
10 10 10 10 
0 
0 


=== PDF PAGE 353 ===
Problems 337 
At injection 
/- Pass 
A 
Final value 7 
t 
Figure P14.9 RTD for a closed recirculating system. 
14.10. A reactor with a number of dividing baffles is to be used to run the 
reaction 
A -+ R 
with 
-rA = 0.05 CA mollliter. min 
A pulse tracer test gives the following output curve: 
Time,min 
I 
0 
10 20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
Concentrationreading 
1 
35 
38 
40 
40 
39 
37 
36 
35 
(a) Find the area under the C versus t curve. 
(b) Find the E versus t curve. 
(c) Calculate the variance of the E curve. 
(d) How many tanks in series is this vessel equivalent to? 
(e) Calculate XA assuming plug flow. 
(f) Calculate XA assuming mixed flow. 
(g) Calculate XA assuming the tanks-in-series model. 
(h) Calculate XA directly from the data. 
14.11. A reactor has flow characteristics given by the nonnormalized C curve in 
Table P14.11, and by the shape of this curve we feel that the dispersion 
or tanks-in-series models should satisfactorily represent flow in the reactor. 
(a) Find the conversion expected in this reactor, assuming that the disper- 
sion model holds. 
(b) Find the number of tanks in series which will represent the reactor 
and the conversion expected, assuming that the tanks-in-series 
model holds. 


=== PDF PAGE 354 ===
338 
Chapter 14 The Tanks-in-Series Model 
Table P14.11. 
Time 
Tracer Concentration 
Time 
Tracer Concentration 
0 
0 
10 
67 
1 
9 
15 
47 
2 
57 
20 
32 
3 
81 
30 
15 
4 
90 
41 
7 
5 
90 
52 
3 
6 
86 
67 
1 
8 
77 
70 
0 
(c) Find the conversion by direct use of the tracer curve. 
(d) Comment on the difference in these results, and state which one you 
think is the most reliable. 
Data. The elementary liquid-phase reaction taking place is A + B -+ 
products, with a large enough excess of B so that the reaction is essentially 
first order. In addition, if plug flow existed, conversion would be 99% in 
the reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 355 ===
Chapter 15 
The Convection Model for 
Laminar Flow 
When a tube or pipe is long enough and the fluid is not very viscous, then the 
dispersion or tanks-in-series model can be used to represent the flow in these 
vessels. For a viscous fluid, one has laminar flow with its characteristic parabolic 
velocity profile. Also, because of the high viscosity there is but slight radial 
diffusion between faster and slower fluid elements. In the extreme we have the 
pure convection model. This assumes that each element of fluid slides past its 
neighbor with no interaction by molecular diffusion. Thus the spread in residence 
times is caused only by velocity variations. This flow is shown in Fig. 15.1. This 
chapter deals with this model. 
15.1 THE CONVECTION MODEL AND ITS RTD 
How to Tell from Theory Which Model to Use 
The first question to ask is, "Which model should be used in a given situation?" 
The following chart, adapted from Ananthakrishnan et al. (1965), tells what 
regime you are in and which model to use. Just locate the point on Fig. 15.2 
which corresponds to the fluid being used (Schmidt number), the flow conditions 
(Reynolds number), and vessel geometry (LldJ. But be sure to check that your 
system is not in turbulent flow. Remember that this chart only has meaning if 
you have laminar flow. In this chart !3lud, is the reciprocal of the Bodenstein 
number. It measures the flow contribution made by molecular diffusion. It is 
NOT the axial dispersion number, Dlud, except in the pure diffusion regime. 
The pure diffusion regime is not a very interesting regime because it represents 
very very slow flow. 
Gases are likely to be in the dispersion regime, not the pure convection regime. 
Liquids can well be in one regime or another. Very viscous liquids such as 
polymers are likely to be in the pure convection regime. If your system falls in 
the no-man's-land between regimes, calculate the reactor behavior based on 


=== PDF PAGE 356 ===
340 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 
Fluid close to the 
wall moves slowly 
I 
Fastest flowing fluid 
element is in the center 
Figure 15.1 Flow of fluid according to the convec- 
tion model. 
the two bounding regimes and then try averaging. The numerical solution is 
impractically complex to use. 
Finally, it is very important to use the correct type of model because the RTD 
curves are completely different for the different regimes. As an illustration, Fig. 
15.3 shows RTD curves typical of these regimes. 
Lld, 
Figure 15.2 Map showing which flow models 
should be used in any situation. 


=== PDF PAGE 357 ===
15.1 The Convection Model and its RTD 341 
Pure diffusion gives 
a pulse output at t = 0 
(open-open vessel) \ 
The dispersion model 
Pure convection glves 
gives a more or less 
4 
the same curve for all 
& 
distorted bell s h a ~ e d  
flow conditions 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
f- Tracer in 
at time zero 
Mean for ail 
three curves 
Figure 15.3 Comparison of the RTD of the three models. 
How to Tell from Experiment Which Model to Use 
The sharpest way of experimentally distinguishing between models comes by 
noting how a pulse or sloppy input pulse of tracer spreads as it moves downstream 
in a flow channel. For example, consider the flow, as shown in Fig. 15.4. The 
dispersion or tanks-in-series models are both stochastic models; thus, from Eq. 
13.8 or Eq. 14.3 we see that the variance grows linearly with distance or 
The convective model is a deterministic model; thus, the spread of tracer grows 
linearly with distance, or 
Whenever you have measurements of a at 3 points use this test to tell which 
model to use. Just see if, in Fig. 15.4, 
Figure 15.4 The changing spread of a tracer curve tells which model is the right 
one to use. 


=== PDF PAGE 358 ===
342 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 
Flux introduction 
Planar introduction 
Proportional to velocity; 
more tracer at centerline 
very little at the wall 
Flux measurement 
Evenly distributed across pipe; 
multiple injectors, a flash of 
light on photosensitive fluid 
Planar measurement 
Mixing cup measurement; 
This could be a through-the-wall 
catch all the exit fluid. 
measurement such as with a light 
In essence this measures u . 
C 
meter or radioactivity counter; also 
a series of probes (for example 
conductivity) across the tube. 
This measures Cat an instant 
Figure 15.5 Various ways of introducing and measuring tracer. 
Pulse Response Experiment and the E Curve for Laminar Flow in Pipes 
The shape of the response curve is strongly influenced by the way tracer is 
introduced into the flowing fluid, and how it is measured. You may inject or 
measure the tracer in two main ways, as shown in Fig. 15.5. We therefore have 
four combinations of boundary conditions, as shown in Fig. 15.6, each with its 
own particular E curve. These E curves are shown in Fig. 15.7. 
As may be seen in Fig. 15.7, the E, E*, and E** curves are quite different, 
one from the other. 
E is the proper response curve for reactor purposes; it is the curve treated 
in Chapter 11, and it represents the RTD in the vessel. 
E* and *E are identical always, so we will call them E* from now on. One 
correction for the planar boundary condition will transform this curve to 
the proper RTD. 
E** requires two corrections-one for entrance, one for exit-to 
transform 
it to a proper RTD. 
It may be simpler to determine E* or E** rather than E. This is perfectly all 
right. However, remember to transform these measured tracer curves to the E 
curve before calling it the RTD. Let us see how to make this transformation. 
Flux flux 
Flux. planar 
Planar flux 
Planar. planar 
Figure 15.6 Various combinations of input-output methods. 


=== PDF PAGE 359 ===
15.1 
The Convection Model and its RTD 343 
Figure 15.7 Note how different are the output curves depending on how you introduce and 
measure tracer. 
For pipes and tubes with their parabolic velocity profile the various pulse 
response curves are found to be as follows: 
t2 
- t 
E = -  for t z -  
2t3 
2 
and 
1 
1 
E,=- 
for 
O r -  
2 O3 
2 
p* = w 
- 
t 
E* = - 
t 
2t2 for t r - 
2 
and 
1 
E? = - 
1 
2 O2 for 132 - 
2 
p** = CO 
1 
E** 
= - 
t 
2t for t r -  
2 
and 
1 
E$* 
= - 
1 
2 O for 
O r -  2 
where p, p*, and p** are the mean values of the measured curves. 


=== PDF PAGE 360 ===
344 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 
Flux flux 
Flux planar 
Figure 15.8 Two different ways of measuring the output curves. 
Note the simple relationship between E, E*, and E*". 
Thus at any time we 
can write 
E$* 
= 8 E$ = O2 EB 
v 
where 7 = - 
v 
t 
t2 
Step Response Experiments and the F Curve for Laminar Flow in Pipes 
When we do the step experiment by switching from one fluid to the other we 
obtain the C,,,, curve (see Chapter ll), from which we should be able to find 
the F curve. However, this input always represents the flux input, while the 
output can be either planar or flux. Thus we only have two combinations, as 
shown in Fig. 15.8. With these two combinations of boundary conditions their 
equations and graphs are given in Eq. 6 and Fig. 15.9. 
1 
F=l-- 
for 
4 O2 
where 
8 = t 
1 
F*= I-- 
for 8 2 -  
2 8 
t 
Laminar flow in pipes 
1 -------------....-.....---....-.--.... 
,g=&=L 
t 
V/u 
Figure 15.9 Different ways of measuring the out- 
put gives different F curves. 


=== PDF PAGE 361 ===
15.2 Chemical Conversion in Laminar Flow Reactors 345 
Also each F curve is related to its corresponding E curve. Thus at any time t, 
or 6, 
01 * 
F* = 1; E: dl = 1 E0 do and E: = 
or E: =@I 
(7) 
0 
do 0, 
The relationship is similar between E and F. 
E Curves for Non-newtonians and for Non-circular Channels 
Since plastics and nonnewtonians are often very viscous they usually should be 
treated by the convective model of this chapter. The E, E*, and E** curves for 
various situations besides newtonian fluids in circular pipes have been developed, 
for example, 
for power law fluids 
for Bingham plastics 
E curves have also been developed 
for falling films 
for flow between parallel plates 
where line measurements are made rather than across the whole vessel 
cross section. 
These E equations and corresponding charts plus sources to various other analy- 
ses can be found in Levenspiel, (1996). 
15.2 CHEMICAL CONVERSION IN LAMINAR FLOW REACTORS 
Single n-th Order Reactions 
In the pure convection regime (negligible molecular diffusion) each element of 
fluid follows its own streamline with no intermixing with neighboring elements. 
In essence this gives macrofluid behavior. From Chapter 11 the conversion expres- 
sion is then 
for zero reaction order 
CA 
-- 
kt 
C
~
O
 
-I-- 
f o r t s  -- 
CAO 
CAO 
k 
for first order reaction 
r 
CA 
C~~ = e -kt 
c~ - 
for second order reaction - 
1 
- 
1 
CAO 
1 + kCAOt 


=== PDF PAGE 362 ===
346 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 
For zero-order reaction of a newtonian in laminar flow in a pipe, integration of 
Eq. 8 gives 
For first-order reaction of a newtonian in laminar flow in a pipe, 
where ei(y) is the exponential integral, see Chapter 16. 
For second-order reaction of a newtonian in laminar flow in a pipe: 
These performance expressions were first developed by Bosworth (1948) for 
zero order, by Denbigh (1951) for second order, and by Cleland and Wilhelm 
(1956) for first order reactions. For other kinetics, channel shapes, or types of 
fluids insert the proper terms in the general performance expression and integrate. 
Comments 
(a) Test for the RTD curve. Proper RTD curves must satisfy the material 
balance checks (calculated zero and first moments should agree with mea- 
sured values) 
E . ~ B  = 1 
and 1' BE,dB = 1 
0 
0 
(12) 
The E curves of this chapter, for non-newtonians and all shapes of channels, 
all meet this requirement. All the E* and E** curves of this chapter do 
not; however, their transforms to E do. 
(b) The variance and other RTD descriptors. The variance of all the E curves 
of this chapter is finite; but it is infinite for all the E* and E** curves. So 
be sure you know which curve you are dealing with. 
In general the convection model E curve has a long tail. This makes 
the measurement of its variance unreliable. Thus cr2 is not a useful parame- 
ter for convection models and is not presented here. 
The breakthrough time 8, is probably the most reliably measured and 
most useful descriptive parameter for convection models, so it is widely 
used. 
(c) Comparison with plug flow for nth-order reaction is shown in Fig. 15.10. 
This graph shows that even at high XA convective flow does not drastically lower 
reactor performance. This result differs from the dispersion and tanks-in-series 
models (see Chapters 13 and 14). 


=== PDF PAGE 363 ===
15.2 Chemical Conversion in Laminar Flow Reactors 347 
Convection versus 
- 
1 
I 
/ 
I 
I
/
 
Figure 15.10 Convective flow lowers conversion compared to plug flow. 
Multiple Reaction in Laminar Flow 
Consider a two-step first-order irreversible reactions in series 
Because laminar flow represents a deviation from plug flow, the amount of 
intermediate formed will be somewhat less than for plug flow. Let us examine 
this situation. 
PFR 
LFR 
PFR 
LFR 
M FR 
Figure 15.11 Typical product distribution curves for laminar flow compared 
with the curves for plug flow (Fig. 8.13) and mixed flow (Fig. 8.14). 


=== PDF PAGE 364 ===
348 
Chapter 15 The Convection Model for Laminar Flow 
The disappearance of A is given by the complicated Eq. 10, and the formation 
and disappearance of R is given by an even more complicated equation. Devel- 
oping the product distribution relationship, solving numerically, and comparing 
the results with those for plug flow and for mixed flow gives Fig. 15.11; see 
Johnson (1970) and Levien and Levenspiel (1998). 
This graph shows that the LFR gives a little less intermediate than does the 
PFR, about 20% of the way from the PFR to the MFR. 
We should be able to generalize these findings to other more complex reaction 
systems, such as for two component multistep reactions; to polymerizations; and 
to nowNewtonian power law fluids. 
REFERENCES 
Ananthakrishnan, V., Gill, W. N., and Barduhn, A. J., AIChE J., 11,1063 (1965). 
Bosworth, R. C. L., Phil. Mag., 39, 847 (1948). 
Cleland, F. A., and Wilhelm, R. H., AIChE J., 2, 489 (1956). 
Denbigh, K. G., J. Appl. Chem., 1,227 (1951). 
Johnson, M. M., Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundamentals, 9, 681 (1970). 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Chap. 68, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR 
97339, 1996. 
Levien, K. L., and Levenspiel, O., Chem. Eng. Sci., 54, 2453 (1999). 
PROBLEMS 
A viscous liquid is to react while passing through a tubular reactor in which flow 
is expected to follow the convection model. What conversion can we expect in 
this reactor if plug flow in the reactor will give 80% conversion? 
15.1. Reaction follows zero-order kinetics. 
15.2. Reaction is second order. 
15.3. Assuming plug flow we calculate that a tubular reactor 12 m long would 
give 96% conversion of A for the second-order reaction A --+ R. However, 
the fluid is very viscous, and flow will be strongly laminar, thus we expect 
the convection model, not the plug flow model, to closely represent the 
flow. How long should we make the reactor to insure 96% conversion of A? 
15.4. Aqueous A (C,, 
= 1 mollliter) with physical properties close to water 
(p = 1000 kg/m3, CB = 
m2/s) reacts by a first-order homogeneous 
reaction (A -t R, k = 0.2 s-I) as it flows at 100 mm/s through a tubular 
reactor (d, = 50 mm, L = 5 m). Find the conversion of A in the fluid 
leaving this reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 365 ===
Problems 349 
15.5. Aqueous A (CAO = 50 mol/m3) with physical properties close to water ( p  = 
1000 kg/m3, !3 = 
m2/s) reacts by a second-order reaction (k = 
m3/mol. s) as it flows at 10 mmls through a tubular reactor (d, = 10 mm, 
L = 20 m). Find the conversion of reactant A from this reactor. 
15.6. We want to model the flow of fluid in a flow channel. For this we locate 
three measuring points A, B, and C, 100 m apart along the flow channel. 
We inject tracer upstream of point A, fluid flows past points A, B, and C 
with the following results: 
At A the tracer width is 2 m 
At B the tracer width is 10 m 
At C the tracer width is 14 m 
What type of flow model would you try to use to represent this flow: 
dispersion, convective, tanks-in-series, or none of these? Give a reason for 
your answer. 


=== PDF PAGE 366 ===
Chapter 1 
Earliness of Mixing, 
Segregation, and RTD 
The problem associated with the mixing of fluids during reaction is important for 
extremely fast reactions in homogeneous systems, as well as for all heterogeneous 
systems. This problem has two overlapping aspects: first, the degree of segregation 
of the fluid, or whether mixing occurs on the microscopic level (mixing of individ- 
ual molecules) or the macroscopic level (mixing of clumps, groups, or aggregates 
of molecules); and second, the earliness of mixing, or whether fluid mixes early 
or late as it flows through the vessel. 
These two concepts are intertwined with the concept of RTD, so it becomes 
rather difficult to understand their interaction. Please reread the first few pages 
of Chapter 11 where these concepts are introduced and discussed. 
In this chapter we first treat systems in which a single fluid is reacting. Then 
we treat systems in which two fluids are contacted and reacted. 
16.1 SELF-MIXING OF A SINGLE FLUID 
Degree of Segregation 
The normally accepted state of a liquid or gas is that of a microfluid, and 
all previous discussions on homogeneous reactions have been based on the 
assumption. Let us now consider a single reacting macrofluid being processed 
in turn in batch, plug flow, and mixed flow reactors, and let us see how this state 
of aggregation can result in behavior different from that of a microfluid. 
Batch Reactor. Let the batch reactor be filled with a macrofluid containing 
reactant A. Since each aggregate or packet of macrofluid acts as its own little 
batch reactor, conversion is the same in all aggregates and is in fact identical to 
what would be obtained with a microfluid. Thus for batch operations the degree 
of segregation does not affect conversion or product distribution. 
Plug Flow Reactor. Since plug flow can be visualized as a flow of small batch 
reactors passing in succession through the vessel, macro- and microfluids act 


=== PDF PAGE 367 ===
16.1 Self-Mixing of a Single Fluid 351 
Individual molecules lose their 
identity, and reactant 
concentration in uniform 
throughout 
Figure 16.1 Difference in behavior i 
flow reactors. 
Each aggregate retains its identity 
and acts as a batch reactor; 
reactant concentration varies from 
aggregate to aggregate 
3f microfluids and macrofluids in mixed 
alike. Consequently the degree of segregation does not influence conversion or 
product distribution. 
Mixed Flow Reactor-Microfluid. 
When a microfluid containing reactant A is 
treated as in Fig. 16.1, the reactant concentration everywhere drops to the low 
value prevailing in the reactor. No clump of molecules retains its high initial 
concentration of A. We may characterize this by saying that each molecule loses 
its identity and has no determinable past history. In other words, by examining 
its neighbors we cannot tell whether a molecule is a newcomer or an old-timer 
in the reactor. 
For this system the conversion of reactant is found by the usual methods for 
homogeneous reactions, or 
or, with no density changes, 
where 7 is the mean residence time of fluid in the reactor. 
Mixed Flow Reactor-Macrofluid. 
When a macrofluid enters a mixed flow reac- 
tor, the reactant concentration in an aggregate does not drop immediately to a 
low value but decreases in the same way as it would in a batch reactor. Thus a 
molecule in a macrofluid does not lose its identity, its past history is not unknown, 
and its age can be estimated by examining its neighboring molecules. 
The performance equation for a macrofluid in a mixed flow reactor is given 
by Eq. 11.13 as 
- 
CA 
CA 
1 - X  A -  --=I (-) 
Edt 
CAO 
0 CAO batch 


=== PDF PAGE 368 ===
352 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
where 
V 
e-t/i 
E dt = - e-"/V dt = - 
dt 
v 
t 
Replacing Eq. 3 in Eq. 2 gives 
This is the general equation for determining conversion of macrofluids in mixed 
flow reactors, and it may be solved once the kinetics of the reaction is given. 
Consider various reaction orders. 
For a zero-order reaction in a batch reactor, Chapter 3 gives 
Inserting into Eq. 4 and integrating gives 
For afirst-order reaction in a batch, reactor Chapter 3 gives 
On replacing into Eq. 4 we obtain 
which on integration gives the expression for conversion of a macrofluid in a 
mixed flow reactor 
This equation is identical to that obtained for a microfluid; for example, see Eq. 
5.14a. Thus we conclude that the degree of segregation has no effect on conversion 
for first-order reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 369 ===
16.1 Self-Mixing of a Single Fluid 353 
For a second-order reaction of a single reactant in a batch reactor Eq. 3.16 gives 
On replacing into Eq. 4 we find 
and by letting a = l/CAokt and converting into reduced time units 0 = tlt, this 
expression becomes 
This is the conversion expression for second-order reaction of a macrofluid in a 
mixed flow reactor. The integral, represented by ei(a) is called an exponential 
integral. It is a function alone of a ,  and its value is tabulated in a number of 
tables of integrals. Table 16.1 presents a very abbreviated set of values for both 
ei(x) and Ei(x). We will refer to this table later in the book. 
Table 16.1 Two of the Family of Exponential Integrals 
x2 
x3 
~ i ( x ) =  eYdu=0.57721+lnx+x+-+-+. 
. 
Here are two useful 
2-2! 3.3 
exponential integrals 
x2 
x3 
-0.57721-lnx+x-- 
+--. 
. . 
2.2! 
3.3! 
x 
Ei(x) 
ei(x) 
x 
Ei (x) 
0 
-to 
+ m  
0.2 
-0.8218 
0.01 
-4.0179 
4.0379 
0.3 
-0.3027 
0.02 
-3.3147 
3.3547 
0.5 
0.4542 
0.05 
-2.3679 
2.4679 
1.0 
1.8951 
0.1 
-1.6228 
1.8229 
1.4 
3.0072 
Reference: "Tables of Sines, Cosines and Exponential Integrals," Vols. I and 11, by WPA, for NBS (1940). 


=== PDF PAGE 370 ===
354 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
Equation 8 may be compared with the corresponding expression for microflu- 
ids, Eq. 5.14 
For an nth-order reaction the conversion in a batch reactor can be found by 
the methods of Chapter 3 to be 
Insertion into Eq. 4 gives the conversion for an nth-order reaction of a macrofluid. 
Difference in Performance: Early or Late Mixing, Macro- or Microfluids, 
PFR or MFR 
Figure 16.2 illustrates the difference in performance of macrofluids and microflu- 
ids in mixed flow reactors, and they show clearly that a rise in segregation 
improves reactor performance for reaction orders greater than unity but lowers 
performance for reaction orders smaller than unity. Table 16.2 was used in 
preparing these charts. 
Early and Late Mixing of Fluids 
Each flow pattern of fluid through a vessel has associated with it a definite clearly 
defined residence time distribution (RTD), or exit age distribution function E. 
The converse is not true, however. Each RTD does not define a specific flow 
pattern; hence, a number of flow patterns-some with earlier mixing, others with 
later mixing of fluids-may 
be able to give the same RTD. 
Idealized Pulse RTD. Reflection shows that the only pattern of flow consistent 
with this RTD is one with no intermixing of fluid of different ages, hence, that 
of plug flow. Consequently it is immaterial whether we have a micro- or macro- 
fluid. In addition the question of early or late mixing of fluid is of no concern 
since there is no mixing of fluid of different ages. 
Exponential Decay RTD. The mixed flow reactor can give this RTD. However, 
other flow patterns can also give this RTD, for example, a set of parallel plug 
flow reactors of proper length, a plug flow reactor with sidestreams, or a combina- 
tion of these. Figure 16.3 shows a number of these patterns. Note that in patterns 
a and b entering fluid elements mix immediately with material of different ages, 
while in patterns c and d no such mixing occurs. Thus patterns a and b represent 
the microfluid, while patterns c and d represent the macrofluid. 


=== PDF PAGE 371 ===
16.1 Self-Mixing of a Single Fluid 355 
Figure 16.2 Comparison of performance of mixed flow reactors treat- 
ing micro- and macrofluids; for zero- and second-order reactions 
with 
= 0. 
Arbitrary RTD. In extending this argument we see that when the RTD is close 
to that of plug flow, then the state of segregation of fluid as well as early or late 
mixing of fluid has little effect on conversion. However, when the RTD ap- 
proaches the exponential decay of mixed flow, then the state of segregation and 
earliness of mixing become increasingly important. 
For any RTD one extreme in behavior is represented by the macrofluid and 
the latest mixing microfluid, and Eq. 2 gives the performance expression for this 
case. The other extreme is represented by the earliest mixing microfluid. The 
performance expression for this case has been developed by Zwietering (1959) 
but is difficult to use. Although these extremes give the upper and lower bound 
to the expected conversion for real vessels, it is usually simpler and preferable 
to develop a model to reasonably approximate the real vessel and then calculate 
conversions from this model. This is what actually was done in developing Fig. 
13.20 for second-order reaction with axial dispersion. There we assumed that 
the same extent of mixing occurs along the whole vessel. 


=== PDF PAGE 372 ===
% 
Ch 
Table 16.2 Conversion Equations for Macrofluids and Microfluids with E = 0 in Ideal Reactors 
Plug Flow 
Mixed Flow 
Microfluid or Macrofluid 
Microfluid 
Macrofluid 
General kinetics 
- 
c 
= ' 
Jm (") 
e - l l ~  dt 
CO 7 0 
CO 
batch 
nth-order reaction 
( R  = Ci;-'k~) 
First-order reaction 
( R  = k7) 
Second-order reaction 
c -  1 
-- 
c
-
-
1
+
m
 
C, 
l + R  
co 
2R 
- 
C - ellR 
- - -ei (k) 
( R  = Cok7) 
co 
R = - - 1  
co 
R 
C 
- - 
R = Ci-'k~, reaction rate group for nth-order reaction, a time or capacity factor. T = i since E = 0 throughout. 


=== PDF PAGE 373 ===
16.1 Self-Mixing of a Single Fluid 357 
/ ,
v
!
!
l
-
*
\
 
Mixedflow - 
:---+ 
-
F
d
 
;<C-;T 
\\ 1 
Set of parallel 
plug flow 
(c) 
Side leaving 
,- plug flow 
L S i d e  feeding 
plug flow 
(6) 
(d) 
Figure 16.3 Four contacting patterns which can all give the same expo- 
nential decay RTD. Cases a and b represent the earliest possible mixing 
while cases c and d represent the latest possible mixing of fluid elements 
of different ages. 
Summary of Findings for a Single Fluid 
1. Factors affecting the performance of a reactor. In general we may write 
kinetics, RTD, degree of segregation, 
Performance: XA or cp (g) = ( 
earliness of mixing 
2. Effect of kinetics, or reaction order. Segregation and earliness of mixing 
affect the conversion of reactant as follows 
For n > 1 - . . Xmacro and Xmicro, late > Xmicro, early 
For n < 1 the inequality is reversed, and for n = 1 conversion is unaffected 
by these factors. This result shows that segregation and late mixing improves 
conversion for n > 1, and decreases conversion for n < 1. 
3. Effect of mixing factors for nonfirst-order reactions. Segregation plays no 
role in plug flow; however, it increasingly affects the reactor performance 
as the RTD shifts from plug to mixed flow. 
4. Effect of conversion level. At low conversion levels X, is insensitive to 
RTD, earliness of mixing, and segregation. At intermediate conversion 
levels, the RTD begins to influence XA; however, earliness and segregation 
still have little effect. This is the case of Example 16.1. Finally, at high 
conversion levels all these factors may play important roles. 
5. Effect on product distribution. Although segregation and earliness of mixing 
can usually be ignored when treating single reactions, this often is not 
so with multiple reactions where the effect of these factors on product 
distribution can be of dominating importance, even at low conversion levels. 


=== PDF PAGE 374 ===
358 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
As an example consider free-radical polymerization. When an occasional 
free radical is formed here and there in the reactor it triggers an extremely 
rapid chain of reactions, often thousands of steps in a fraction of a second. 
The local reaction rate and conversion can thus be very high. In this situation 
the immediate surroundings of the reacting and growing molecules-and 
hence the state of segregation of the fluid-can 
greatly affect the type of 
polymer formed. 
EFFECT OF SEGREGATION AND EARLINESS OF MIXING 
ON CONVERSION 
A second-order reaction occurs in a reactor whose RTD is given in Fig. E16.1. 
Calculate the conversion for the flow schemes shown in this figure. For simplicity 
take C, = 1, k = 1, and r = 1 for each unit. 
Microfluid 
co =-, 
I 
Macrofluid 
3 
I :, 
To approx~mate the 
(c) 
Figure E16.1 (a) Microfluid, early mixing at molecular level; (b) Mi- 
crofluid, fairly late mixing at molecular level; (c) Microfluid, late mixing 
at molecular level; ( d )  Mac~ofluid, early mixing of elements; (e) Mac- 
rofluid, late mixing of elements. 


=== PDF PAGE 375 ===
16.1 Self-Mixing of a Single Fluid 359 
I SOLUTION 
Scheme A. Referring to Fig. E16.1~ we have for the mixed flow reactor 
For the plug flow reactor 
Scheme B. Referring to Fig. E16.lb, we have for the plug flow reactor 
For the mixed reactor 
Micro-fairly late: C; = 0.366 
Scheme C, D, and E. From Fig. 12.1 the exit age distribution function for the 
two equal-size plug-mixed flow reactor system is 
2 
- 
E = = el-2t1t 
t
1
 
, 
when T > - 
t 
t
2
 
t
1
 
= 0, 
when Y < - 
t
2
 


=== PDF PAGE 376 ===
360 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
I 
Thus Eq. 3 becomes 
With the mean residence time in the two-vessel system f = 2 min, this becomes 
l 
and replacing 1 + t by x we obtain the exponential integral 
I 
From the table of integrals in Table 16.1 we find ei(2) = 0.048 90 from which 
Micro-late, and macro-late or early: C" = 0.362 
The results of this example confirm the statements made above: that macrofluids 
and late mixing microfluids give higher conversions than early mixing microfluids 
for reaction orders greater than unity. The difference is small here because the 
conversion levels are low; however, this difference becomes more important as 
conversion approaches unity. 
Extensions for a Single Fluid 
Partial Segregation. There are various ways of treating intermediate extents 
of segregation, for example, 
Intensity of segregation model-Danckwerts 
(1958) 
Coalescence model-Curl 
(1963), Spielman and Levenspiel (1965) 
Two environment and melting ice cube models-Ng 
and Rippin (1965) and 
Suzuki (1970) 
These approaches are discussed in Levenspiel (1972). 
The Life of an Element of Fluid. Let us estimate how long a fluid element 
retains its identity. First, all large elements are broken into smaller elements by 
stretching or folding (laminar behavior) or by turbulence generated by baffles, 
stirrers, etc., and mixing theory estimates the time needed for this breakup. 
Small elements lose their identity by the action of molecular diffusion, and the 
Einstein random walk analysis estimates this time as 
(size of element)' - d2lement 
t =  
-- 
( diffusion \ 
!ZJ 
{coefficient) 


=== PDF PAGE 377 ===
16.2 Mixing of Two Miscible Fluids 361 
Thus an element of water 1 micron in size would lose its identity in a very short 
time, approximately 
t =  
~ m ) ~  
= 
sec 
cm2/sec 
while an element of viscous polymer 1.0 mm in size and 100 times as viscous as 
water (10-30 W motor oil at room temperature) would retain its identity for a 
long time, roughly 
t =  (10-I ~ m ) ~  
= lo5 sec .=; 30 hr 
cm2/sec 
In general, then, ordinary fluids behave as microfluids except for very viscous 
materials and for systems in which very fast reactions are taking place. 
The concept of micro- and macrofluids is of particular importance in heteroge- 
neous systems because one of the two phases of such systems usually approxi- 
mates a macrofluid. For example, the solid phase of fluid-solid systems can be 
treated exactly as a macrofluid because each particle of solid is a distinct aggregate 
of molecules. For such systems, then, Eq. 2 with the appropriate kinetic expression 
is the starting point for design. 
In the chapters to follow we apply these concepts of micro- and macrofluids 
to heterogeneous systems of various kinds. 
16.2 MIXING OF TWO MISCIBLE FLUIDS 
Here we consider one topic, the role of the mixing process when two completely 
miscible reactant fluids A and B are brought together. When two miscible fluids 
A and B are mixed, we normally assume that they first form a homogeneous 
mixture which then reacts. However, when the time required for A and B to 
become homogeneous is not short with respect to the time for reaction to take 
place, reaction occurs during the mixing process, and the problem of mixing 
becomes important. Such is the case for very fast reactions or with very viscous 
reacting fluids. 
To help understand what occurs, imagine that we have A and B available, 
each first as a microfluid, and then as a macrofluid. In one beaker mix micro A 
with micro B, and in another beaker mix macro A with macro B and let them 
react. What do we find? Micro A and B behave in the expected manner, and 
reaction occurs. However, on mixing the macrofluids no reaction takes place 
because molecules of A cannot contact molecules of B. These two situations are 
illustrated in Fig. 16.4. So much for the treatment of the two extremes in behavior. 
Now a real system acts as shown in Fig. 16.5 with regions of A-rich fluid and 
regions of B-rich fluid. 
Though partial segregation requires an increase in reactor size, this is not the 
only consequence. For example, when reactants are viscous fluids, their mixing 
in a stirred tank or batch reactor often places layers or "streaks" of one fluid 
next to the other. As a result reaction occurs at different rates from point to 


=== PDF PAGE 378 ===
362 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
A 
B 
A 
B 
C- 
reaction occurs 
no reaction occurs 
Figure 16.4 Difference in behavior of microfluids and macrofluids 
in the reaction of A and B. 
point in the reactor, giving a nonuniform product which may be commercially 
unacceptable. Such is the case in polymerization reactions in which monomer 
must be intimately mixed with a catalyst. For reactions such as this, proper 
mixing is of primary importance and often the rate of reaction and product 
uniformity correlate well with the mixing energy input to the fluid. 
For fast reactions the increase in reactor size needed because of segregation 
is of secondary importance while other effects become important. For example, 
if the product of reaction is a solid precipitate, the size of the precipitate particles 
may be influenced by the rate of intermixing of reactants, a fact that is well 
known from the analytical laboratory. As another example, hot gaseous reaction 
mixtures may contain appreciable quantities of a desirable compound because 
of favorable thermodynamic equilibrium at such temperatures. To reclaim this 
component the gas may have to be cooled. But, as is often the case, a drop in 
temperature causes an unfavorable shift in equilibrium with essentially complete 
disappearance of desired material. To avoid this and to "freeze" the composition 
of hot gases, cooling must be very rapid. When the method of quenching used 
involves mixing the hot gases with an inert cold gas, the success of such a 
procedure is primarily dependent on the rate at which segregation can be de- 
stroyed. Finally the length, type, and temperature of a burning flame, the combus- 
tion products obtained, the noise levels of jet engines, and the physical properties 
of polymers as they are affected by the molecular weight distribution of the 
A 
r A-rich region 
L ~ - r i c h  region 
B / 
B-rich region 
Figure 16.5 Partial segregation in the mixing of two miscible fluids in a reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 379 ===
16.2 Mixing of Two Miscible Fluids 363 
material are some of the many phenomena that are closely influenced by the 
rate and intimacy of fluid mixing. 
Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 
When multiple reactions take place on mixing two reactant fluids and when 
these reactions proceed to an appreciable extent before homogeneity is attained, 
segregation is important and can affect product distribution. 
Consider the homogeneous-phase competitive consecutive reactions 
occurring when A and B are poured into a batch reactor. If the reactions are 
slow enough so that the contents of the vessel are uniform before reaction takes 
place, the maximum amount of R formed is governed by the k,lk, ratio. This 
situation, treated in Chapter 8, is one in which we may assume microfluid behav- 
ior. If, however, the fluids are very viscous or if the reactions are fast enough, 
they will occur in the narrow zones between regions of high A concentration 
and high B concentration. This is shown in Fig. 16.6. The zone of high reaction 
rate will contain a higher concentration of R than the surrounding fluid. But 
from the qualitative treatment of this reaction in Chapter 8 we know that any 
nonhonrogeneity in A and R will depress formation of R. Thus partial segregation 
of reaotants will depress the formation of intermediate. 
For increased reaction rate, the zone of reaction narrows, and in the limit, for 
an infinitely fast reaction, becomes a boundary surface between the A-rich and 
L- High-reaction-rate zone 
containing a high 
concentration of R 
Figure 16.6 When reaction rate is 
very high, zones of nonhomogene- 
ity exist in a reactor. This condition 
is detrimental to obtaining high 
yields of intermediate R from 
the reactions 


=== PDF PAGE 380 ===
364 
Chapter 16 Earliness of Mixing, Segregation, and RTD 
Fast reaction 
(some R formed) 
Infinitely fast reaction 
(no R formed) 
A-r1ch 'a 
region 
reglon 
A-rich 
\ 
regi0n 
region 
Reaction zone 
J 
Reaction zone 
I 
is a plane 
A-rich 
B-rich 
region 
I I 
region 
! 
Distance 
Distance 
Figure 16.7 Concentration profiles of the components of the reactions 
at a representative spot in the reactor between A-rich and B-rich fluid for a very 
fast and for an infinitely fast reaction. 
B-rich regions. Now R will only be formed at this plane. What will happen to 
it? Consider a single molecule of R formed at the reaction plane. If it starts its 
random wanderings (diffusion) into the A zone and never moves back into the 
B zone, it will not react further and will be saved. However, if it starts off into 
the B zone or if at any time during its wanderings it moves through the reaction 
plane into the B zone, it will be attacked by B to form S. Interestingly enough, 
from probabilities associated with a betting game treated by Feller (1957), we 
can show that the odds in favor of a molecule of R never entering the B zone 
become smaller and smaller as the number of diffusion steps taken by a molecule 
gets larger and larger. This finding holds, no matter what pattern of wanderings 
is chosen for the molecules of R. Thus we conclude that no R is formed. Looked 
at from the point of view of Chapter 8, an infinitely fast reaction gives a maximum 
nonhomogeneity of A and R in the mixture, resulting in no R being formed. 
Figure 16. 7 shows the concentration of materials at a typical reaction interface 
and illustrates these points. 


=== PDF PAGE 381 ===
References 365 
Figure 16.8 Stretching, folding, and 
thinning of sheets of very viscous A 
and B. 
This behavior of multiple reaction could provide a powerful tool in the study 
of partial segregation in homogeneous systems. It has been used by Paul and 
Treybal(1971) who simply poured reactant B into a beaker of A and measured 
the amount of R formed for a very fast reaction of Eq. 14. 
Ottino (1989, 1994) discuss the whole problem of intermixing of fluids A and 
B in terms of stretching, folding, thinning, and finally diffusional mixing of fluid 
elements. Figure 16.8 tries to illustrate this mechanism; however, we must now 
leave this fascinating subject. 
These observations serve as a guide to the selection and design of equipment 
favoring the formation of intermediate when reaction is very fast. The important 
point is to achieve homogeneity in A and R throughout the reaction mixture 
before reaction has proceeded to any significant extent. This is done by: 
(a) making the reaction zone as large as possible by vigorous mixing. 
(b) dispersing B in A in as fine a form as possible, rather than A in B. 
(c) slowing the reaction. 
REFERENCES 
Curl, R. L., AZChE J., 9, 175 (1963). 
Danckwerts, P. V., Chem. Eng. Sci., 8, 93 (1958). 
Feller, W., An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol I ,  2nd ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1957, p. 254. 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reaction Engineering, 2nd ed., Chap. 10, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, 1972. 
Ng, D. Y. C., and Rippin, D. W. T., Third Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1965. 
Ottino, J. M., Scientific American, 56, Jan. 1989. 
-, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 49, 4005 (1994). 
Paul, E. L., and Treybal, R. E., AZChE J., 17,718 (1971). 
Spielman, L. A., and Levenspiel, O., Chem. Eng. Sci., 20,247 (1965). 
Suzuki, M., personal communication, 1970. 
Zweitering, Th. N., Chem. Eng. Sci., 11, 1 (1959). 


=== PDF PAGE 382 ===


=== PDF PAGE 383 ===
Part I11 
Reactions Catalyzed by Solids 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
1369 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 1376 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 1427 
Chapter 20 Reactors with Suspended Solid Catalyst, Fluidized Reactors of 
Various Types 1447 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 1473 
Chapter 22 GIL Reactions on Solid Catalyst: Trickle Beds, Slurry Reactors, 
Three Phase Fluidized Beds 1500 


=== PDF PAGE 384 ===


=== PDF PAGE 385 ===
Chapter 17 
Heterogeneous 
Reactions-Introduction 
The second half of this book treats the kinetics and design of chemical reactors 
for heterogeneous systems of various kinds, each chapter considering a different 
system (see Chapter 1 for discussions of heterogeneous and homogeneous sys- 
tems). For these systems there are two complicating factors that must be ac- 
counted for beyond what is normally considered in homogeneous systems. First, 
we have the complication of the rate expression, and second the complication 
of the contacting patterns for two-phase systems. Let us briefly discuss these 
in turn. 
The Complications of the Rate Equation. Since more than one phase is present, 
the movement of material from phase to phase must be considered in the rate 
equation. Thus the rate expression in general will incorporate mass transfer 
terms in addition to the usual chemical kinetics term. These mass transfer terms 
are different in type and numbers in the different kinds of heterogeneous systems; 
hence, no single rate expression has general application. Here are some sim- 
ple examples. 
THE BURNING OF A CARBON PARTICLE IN AIR 
Tell how many rate steps are involved. The kinetics is given by 
C + O,+CO, 
and ignore the possible formation of CO. 
From Fig. E17.1 we see that two steps in series are involved-mass 
transfer of 
oxygen to the surface followed by reaction at the surface of the particle. 
369 


=== PDF PAGE 386 ===
370 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
J' 
r,sJ;,. 
Model - 
' 3 2  
Burning carbon particle 
Gas film 
Fig. E17.1 
AEROBIC FERMENTATION 
w many rate steps are involved when air bubbles through a tank of liquid 
product material. 
From Fig. E17.2 we see that there are up to seven possible resistance steps, only 
one involving the reaction. How many you choose to consider depends on you 
and on the situation. 
To get an overall rate expression, write the individual rate steps on the same 
basis (unit surface of burning particle, unit volume of fermenter, unit volume of 
cells, etc.). 
1 dNA - 
mol A reacted 
- T A =  
V dt 
volume of reactor fluid. time 


=== PDF PAGE 387 ===
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
371 
1 dNA 
mol A reacted 
- r i =  
- 
- 
W dt 
mass of solid. time 
1 dNA - 
mol A reacted 
-rL= 
S dt 
interfacial surface. time 
Now put all the mass transfer and reaction steps into the same rate form and 
then combine. Thus 
mol A reacted - 
- (-rA)v = ( - r i ) W  = (-rL)S 
time 
and if the steps are in series, as in Examples 17.1 and 17.2 
roverall = r1 = r2 = r3 
If they are in parallel 
Consider steps in series. In general, if all the steps are linear in concentration, 
then it is easy to combine them. However, if any of the steps are nonlinear, then 
you will get a messy overall expression. Therefore, you may try to bypass this 
nonlinear step in one of various ways. Approximating the r, versus C, 
curve by 
a first-order expression is probably the most useful procedure. 
Another point: in combining rates we normally do not know the concentration 
of materials at intermediate conditions, so these are the concentrations that we 
eliminate in combining rates. Example 17.3 shows this. 


=== PDF PAGE 388 ===
372 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
0 VERALL RATE FOR A LINEAR PROCESS 
Dilute A diffuses through a stagnant liquid film onto a plane surface consisting 
of B, reacts there to produce R which diffuses back into the mainstream. Develop 
the overall rate expression for the L/S reaction 
A(1) + B (s) -+ R(1) 
which takes place on this flat surface, see Fig. E17.3. 
Figure E17.3. 
SOLUTION 
I 
By diffusion, the flux of A to the surface is 
Reaction is first order with respect to A, so based on unit surface 
At steady state the flow rate to the surface is equal to the reaction rate at the 
surface (steps in series). So 
and from Eqs. (i) and (ii) 


=== PDF PAGE 389 ===
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
373 
from which 
(iii) 
Replacing Eq. (iii) into either Eq. (i) or Eq. (ii) then eliminates C, which cannot 
be measured, giving 
Comment This result shows that llk, and llk" are additive resistances. It so 
happens that the addition of resistances to obtain on overall resistance is permissi- 
ble only when the rate is a linear function of the driving force and when the 
processes occur in series. 
OVERALL RATE FOR A NONLINEAR PROCESS 
Repeat Example 17.3 with just one change: let the reaction step be second order 
with respect to A, or 
1 SOLUTION 
Combining the reaction steps to eliminate C, 
as was done in Example 17.3, is 
now not so simple, and gives 
Contacting Patterns for Two-Phase Systems 
There are many ways that two phases can be contacted, and for each the design 
equation will be unique. Design equations for these ideal flow patterns may 
be developed without too much difficulty. However, when real flow deviates 
considerably from these, we can do one of two things: we may develop models 
to mirror actual flow closely, or we may calculate performance with ideal patterns 
which "bracket" actual flow. Fortunately, most real reactors for heterogeneous 
systems can be satisfactorily approximated by one of the five ideal flow patterns 
of Fig. 17.1. Notable exceptions are the reactions which take place in fluidized 
beds. There special models must be developed. 


=== PDF PAGE 390 ===
374 
Chapter 17 Heterogeneous Reactions-Introduction 
Plug Alplug B 
Plug Alplug B 
Plug Alplug B 
countercurrent 
cocurrent 
crosscurrent 
Micro-micro 
Reaction in either 
A or B phase 
A 
Reaction in either 
Plug Almixed B 
Mixed Alrnixed B 
(two cases) 
(two cases) 
Figure 17.1. Ideal contacting patterns for two flowing fluids. 
Final Thoughts on Flow Modeling 
In reactor design and scale-up, it is essential to select a flow model which reason- 
ably represents our setup. Too often we put too little thought here, carelessly 
picking a nonrepresentative model and then doing computer calculations to the 
nth degree of accuracy. And then we are surprised when design and scale-up do 
not agree with our predictions. A simple reasonable model is much better than 
a precise and detailed model which does not represent the contacting. Often the 
choice of a good flow model and the knowledge of how the flow pattern changes 
with scale-up spells the difference between success and failure. 
The preceding thoughts guide us in our approach to heterogeneous reaction, 
which we will consider in the rest of the book. 
PROBLEMS 
17.1. Gaseous reactant A diffuses through a gas film and reacts on the surface 
of a solid according to a reversible first-order rate, 
where CA, is the concentration of A in equilibrium with the solid surface. 
Develop an expression for the rate of reaction of A accounting for both 
the mass transfer and reaction steps. 


=== PDF PAGE 391 ===
Problems 375 
17.2. Example 17.4 gives the final rate expression for film mass transfer followed 
by a second-order rate expression for reaction on a plane surface. Please 
derive this expression and show that it is correct. 
17.3. In slurry reactors, pure reactant gas is bubbled through liquid containing 
suspended catalyst particles. Let us view these kinetics in terms of the film 
theory, as shown in Fig. P17.3. Thus, to reach the surface of the solid, the 
Typical liquid- 
Figure P17.3 
reactant which enters the liquid must diffuse through the liquid film into 
the main body of liquid, and then through the film surrounding the catalyst 
particle. At the surface of the particle, reactant yields product according 
to first-order kinetics. Derive an expression for the rate of reaction in terms 
of these resistances. 


=== PDF PAGE 392 ===
Chapter 18 
Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
With many reactions, the rates are affected by materials which are neither re- 
actants nor products. Such materials called catalysts can speed a reaction by a 
factor of a million or much more, or they may slow a reaction (negative catalyst). 
There are two broad classes of catalysts: those that operate at close to ambient 
temperature with biochemical systems, and the man-made catalysts that operate 
at high temperature. 
The biochemical catalysts, called enzymes, are found everywhere in the bio- 
chemical world and in living creatures, and without their action I doubt that life 
could exist at all. In addition, in our bodies hundreds of different enzymes and 
other catalysts are busily at work all the time, keeping us alive. We treat these 
catalysts in Chapter 27. 
The man-made catalysts, mostly solids, usually aim to cause the high-tempera- 
ture rupture or synthesis of materials. These reactions play an important role in 
many industrial processes, such as the production of methanol, sulfuric acid, 
ammonia, and various petrochemicals, polymers, paints, and plastics. It is esti- 
mated that well over 50% of all the chemical products produced today are made 
with the use of catalysts. These materials, their reaction rates, and the reactors 
that use them are the concern of this chapter and Chapters 19-22. 
Consider petroleum. Since this consists of a mixture of many compounds, 
primarily hydrocarbons, its treatment under extreme conditions will cause a 
variety of changes to occur simultaneously, producing a spectrum of compounds, 
some desirable, others undesirable. Although a catalyst can easily speed the rate 
of reactions a thousandfold or a millionfold, still, when a variety of reactions 
are encountered, the most important characteristic of a catalyst is its selectivity. 
By this we mean that it only changes the rates of certain reactions, often a single 
reaction, leaving the rest unaffected. Thus, in the presence of an appropriate 
catalyst, products containing predominantly the materials desired can be obtained 
from a given feed. 
The following are some general observations. 
1. The selection of a catalyst to promote a reaction is not well understood; 
therefore, in practice extensive trial and error may be needed to produce 
a satisfactory catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 393 ===
18.1 The Rate Equation for Surface Kinetics 377 
2. Duplication of the chemical constitution of a good catalyst is no guarantee 
that the solid produced will have any catalytic activity. This observation 
suggests that it is the physical or crystalline structure which somehow imparts 
catalytic activity to a material. This view is strengthened by the fact that 
heating a catalyst above a certain critical temperature may cause it to lose 
its activity, often permanently. Thus present research on catalysts is strongly 
centered on the surface structure of solids. 
3. To explain the action of catalysts, it is thought that reactant molecules are 
somehow changed, energized, or affected to form intermediates in the 
regions close to the catalyst surface. Various theories have been proposed 
to explain the details of this action. In one theory, the intermediate is viewed 
as an association of a reactant molecule with a region of the surface; in 
other words, the molecules are somehow attached to the surface. In another 
theory, molecules are thought to move down into the atmosphere close to 
the surface and be under the influence of surface forces. In this view the 
molecules are still mobile but are nevertheless modified. In still a third 
theory, it is thought that an active complex, a free radical, is formed at the 
surface of the catalyst. This free radical then moves back into the main gas 
stream, triggering a chain of reactions with fresh molecules before being 
finally destroyed. In contrast with the first two theories, which consider the 
reaction to occur in the vicinity of the surface, this theory views the catalyst 
surface simply as a generator of free radicals, with the reaction occurring 
in the main body of the gas. 
4. In terms of the transition-state theory, the catalyst reduces the potential 
energy barrier over which the reactants must pass to form products. This 
lowering in energy barrier is shown in Fig. 18.1. 
5. Though a catalyst may speed up a reaction, it never determines the equilib- 
rium or endpoint of a reaction. This is governed by thermodynamics alone. 
Thus with or without a catalyst the equilibrium constant for the reaction 
is always the same. 
Without catalyst the complex 
has high potential energy 
resulting in low rate of reaction 
With catalyst the lower 
energy barrier allows 
higher rate of reaction 
Final 
- I 
state 
Reactants 
Complex 
Products 
* 
Reaction path 
Figure 18.1 Representation of the action of a catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 394 ===
378 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
6. Since the solid surface is responsible for catalytic activity, a large readily 
accessible surface in easily handled materials is desirable. By a variety of 
methods, active surface areas the size of football fields can be obtained per 
cubic centimeter of catalyst. 
Though there are many problems related to solid catalysts, we consider only 
those which are related to the development of kinetic rate equations needed in 
design. We simply assume that we have a catalyst available to promote a specific 
reaction. We wish to evaluate the kinetic behavior of reactants in the presence 
of this material and then use this information for design. 
The Spectrum of Kinetic Regimes 
Consider a porous catalyst particle bathed by reactant A. The rate of reaction 
of A for the particle as a whole may depend on: 
O Surface kinetics, or what happens at the surfaces, interior or exterior of 
the particle. This may involve the adsorption of reactant A onto the surface, 
reaction on the surface, or desorption of product back into the gas stream. 
O Pore diffusion resistance which may cause the interior of the particle to 
be starved for reactant. 
O Particle AT or temperature gradients within the particle. This is caused by 
large heat release or absorption during reaction. 
0 
Film AT between the outer surface of the particle and the main gas stream. 
For example, the particle may be uniform in temperature throughout but 
hotter than the surrounding gas. 
0 Film diffusion resistance or concentration gradients across the gas film 
surrounding the particle. 
For gaslporous catalyst systems slow reactions are influenced by O alone, in 
faster reactions O intrudes to slow the rate, then O and/or 0 
enter the picture, 
O unlikely limits the overall rate. In liquid systems the order in which these 
effects intrude is O, 
0, 
0 ,  and rarely O andlor 0. 
In different areas of application (outside of catalytic kinetics too) different 
combinations of these five factors enter the picture. Table 18.1 shows what we 
normally encounter. 
Table 18.1 Factors which Influence the Rate of Reaction of Particles 
Porous 
Catalyst 
Burning of 
Cells and 
Rate Influencing 
Catalyst 
Coated 
a Droplet 
Simple Living 
Factor 
Particle 
Surface 
of Fuel 
Creatures 
O Surface reaction 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
O Pore diffusion 
Yes 
No 
No 
Maybe 
O Particle AT 
Not too likely 
No 
No 
No 
0 Film AT 
Sometimes 
Rare 
All important 
No 
O Film mass transfer 
No 
Yes 
All important 
Could be 


=== PDF PAGE 395 ===
18.1 The Rate Equation for Surface Kinetics 379 
Although here we introduce all the phenomena which affect the rate, the real 
world is never so exciting that we have to concern ourselves with all five factors 
at any one time. In fact, in the majority of situations with porous catalyst particles 
we only have to consider factors @ and 0. 
Here let us treat factors O and 0; then O and @ briefly. 
18.1 THE RATE EQUATION FOR SURFACE KINETICS 
Because of the great industrial importance of catalytic reactions, considerable 
effort has been spent in developing theories from which kinetic equations can 
rationally be developed. The most useful for our purposes supposes that the 
reaction takes place on an active site on the surface of the catalyst. Thus three 
steps are viewed to occur successively at the surface. 
Step 1. A molecule is adsorbed onto the surface and is attached to an active site. 
Step 2. It then reacts either with another molecule on an adjacent site (dual- 
site mechanism), with one coming from the main gas stream (single-site mecha- 
nism), or it simply decomposes while on the site (single-site mechanism). 
Step 3. Products are desorbed from the surface, which then frees the site. 
In addition, all species of molecules, free reactants, and free products as well 
as site-attached reactants, intermediates, and products taking part in these three 
processes are assumed to be in equilibrium. 
Rate expressions derived from various postulated mechanisms are all of the 
form 
(kinetic term)(driving force or displacement from equilibrium) 
rate of reaction = 
(resistance term) 
For example, for the reaction 
occurring in the presence of inert carrier material U, the rate expression when 
adsorption of A controls is 
When reaction between adjacent site-attached molecules of A and B controls, 
the rate expression is 


=== PDF PAGE 396 ===
380 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
whereas for desorption of R, controlling it becomes 
Each detailed mechanism of reaction with its controlling factor has its corre- 
sponding rate equation, involving anywhere from three to seven arbitrary con- 
stants, the K values. For reasons to be made clear, we do not intend to use 
equations such as these. Consequently, we do not go into their derivations. These 
are given by Hougen and Watson (1947), Corrigan (1954, 1955), Walas (1959), 
and elsewhere. 
Now, in terms of the contact time or space time, most catalytic conversion 
data can be fitted adequately by relatively simple first- or nth-order rate expres- 
sions (see Prater and Lago, 1956). Since this is so, why should we concern 
ourselves with selecting one of a host of rather complicated rate expressions 
which satisfactorily fits the data? 
The following discussion summarizes the arguments for and against the use 
of simple empirical kinetic equations. 
Truth and Predictability. The strongest argument in favor of searching for the 
actual mechanism is that if we find one which we think represents what truly 
occurs, extrapolation to new and more favorable operating conditions is much 
more safely done. This is a powerful argument. Other arguments, such as aug- 
menting knowledge of the mechanism of catalysis with the final goal of producing 
better catalysts in the future, do not concern a design engineer who has a specific 
catalyst at hand. 
Problems of Finding the Mechanism. To prove that we have such a mechanism 
we must show that the family of curves representing the rate equation type of 
the favored mechanism fits the data so much better than the other families that 
all the others can be rejected. With the large number of parameters (three to 
seven) that can be chosen arbitrarily for each rate-controlling mechanism, a very 
extensive experimental program is required, using very precise and reproducible 
data, which in itself is quite a problem. We should bear in mind that it is not 
good enough to select the mechanism that well fits-or even best fits-the data. 
Difference in fit may be explainable entirely in terms of experimental error. In 
statistical terms these differences may not be "significant." Unfortunately, if a 
number of alternative mechanisms fit the data equally well, we must recognize 
that the equation selected can only be considered to be one of good fit, not one 
that represents reality. With this admitted, there is no reason why we should not 
use the simplest and easiest-to-handle equation of satisfactory fit. In fact, unless 
there are good positive reasons for using the more complicated of two equations, 
we should always select the simpler of the two if both fit the data equally well. 
The statistical analyses and comments by Chou (1958) on the codimer example 
in Hougen and Watson (1947) in which 18 mechanisms were examined illustrate 
the difficulty in finding the correct mechanism from kinetic data, and show that 
even in the most carefully conducted programs of experimentation the magnitude 
of the experimental error will very likely mask the differences predicted by the 
various mechanisms. 


=== PDF PAGE 397 ===
18.2 Pore Diffusion Resistance Combined with Surface Kinetics 381 
Thus it is hardly ever possible to determine with reasonable confidence which 
is the correct mechanism. 
Problems of Combining Resistances. Suppose that we have found the correct 
mechanism and resultant rate equation for the surface phenomenon. Combining 
this step with any of the other resistance steps, such as pore of film diffusion, 
becomes rather impractical. When this has to be done, it is best to replace the 
multiconstant rate equation by an equivalent first-order expression, which can 
then be combined with other reaction steps to yield an overall rate expression. 
Summary on Surface Kinetics. From this discussion we conclude that it is good 
enough to use the simplest available correlating rate expression, hence first-order 
or nth-order kinetics, to represent the surface reaction. 
For additional comments questioning the validity of the active-site approach, 
suggesting forms of kinetic equations to be used in reactor design, and suggesting 
what is the real utility of the active site theory, see the opposing points of view 
presented by Weller (1956) and Boudart (1956). 
18.2 PORE DIFFUSION RESISTANCE COMBINED WITH SURFACE 
KINETICS 
Single Cylindrical Pore, First-Order Reaction 
First consider a single cylindrical pore of length L, with reactant A diffusing into 
the pore, and reacting on the surface by a first-order reaction 
I dNA 
A+product 
and 
-rlk,=---- S dt - PC, 
taking place at the walls of the pore, and product diffusing out of the pore, as 
shown in Fig. 18.2. This simple model will later be extended. 
The flow of materials into and out of any section of pore is shown in detail 
in Fig. 18.3. At steady state a material balance for reactant A for this elementary 
section gives 
output - input + disappearance by reaction = 0 
(4.1) 
or with the quantities shown in Fig. 18.3, 
Rearranging gives 


=== PDF PAGE 398 ===
382 Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Elementary section of catalyst 
pore shown in Fig. 3 
Distance along pore, x 
Figure 18.2 Representation of a cylindrical catalyst 
pore. 
and taking the limit as Ax approaches zero (see the equation above Eq. 13.18a), 
we obtain 
Note that the first-order chemical reaction is expressed in terms of unit surface 
area of the wall of the catalyst pore; hence k" has unit of length per time (see 
Mantle area on which reaction 
Cross-sectional area = Pr2 
/ 
is occurring, S = 2.rrrA.x 
Flow out 
* 
(2IOut= 
-nrz 9 (%) 
out 
I 
Lhl 
Xin 
xout 
Disappearance of A 
= rate of disappearance 
( 
(surface) 
on surface by reaction 
unit surface 
= (- b %) (surface) = X " C ~  
(Znr AX) 
Figure 18.3 Setting up the material balance for the elementary slice 
of catalyst pore. 


=== PDF PAGE 399 ===
18.2 Pore Diffusion Resistance Combined with Surface Kinetics 383 
Eq. 1.4). In general, the interrelation between rate constants on different bases 
is given by 
Hence for the cylindrical catalyst pore 
Thus in terms of volumetric units Eq. 3 becomes 
This is a frequently met linear differential equation whose general solution is 
where 
and where MI and M2 are constants. It is in the evaluation of these constants 
that we restrict the solution to this system alone. We do this by specifying what 
is particular about the model selected, a procedure which requires a clear picture 
of what the model is supposed to represent. These specifications are called the 
boundary conditions of the problem. Since two constants are to be evaluated, 
we must find and specify two boundary conditions. Examining the physical limits 
of the conceptual pore, we find that the following statements can always be 
made. First, at the pore entrance 
Second, because there is no flux or movement of material through the interior 
end of the pore 
With the appropriate mathematical manipulations of Eqs. 7 and 8 we then obtain 


=== PDF PAGE 400 ===
384 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Fractional distance into pore, xlL 
Figure 18.4 Distribution and average value of reactant concentration within a catalyst 
pore as a function of the parameter mL = L- 
Hence the concentration of reactant within the pore is 
CA - em(L-x) + e-m(L-x) cosh m(L - x) 
-- 
- 
- 
c* 
 em^ + e - m ~  
cosh mL 
(10) 
This progressive drop in concentration on moving into the pore is shown in Fig. 
18.4, and this is seen to be dependent on the dimensionless quantity mL, or M,, 
called the Thiele modulus. 
To measure how much the reaction rate is lowered because of the resistance 
to pore diffusion, define the quantity Bcalled the effectiveness factor as follows: 
(actual mean reaction rate within pore) 
Effectiveness factor, 6= (rate if not slowed by pore diffusion) 
(11) 
- 
- 
- 
r ~ ,  
with diffusion 
r ~ ,  
without diffusion resistance 
In particular, for first-order reactions 6= CA/Ch because the rate is proportional 
to the concentration. Evaluating the average rate in the pore from Eq. 10 gives 


=== PDF PAGE 401 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 385 
with sealed ends 
"\ \.\\ 
Volume change on reaction 
\ 
= 1 + E X  = 1, no volume change 
= 2, volume doubles 
= 3, 
volume halves 
\ 
\ 
Thiele modulus: mL = ~m 
Figure 18.5 The effectiveness factor as a function of the parame- 
ter mL or M,, called the Thiele modulus, prepared from Aris 
(1957) and Thiele (1939). 
the relationship 
- 
- CA - tanh mL 
&first order - - 
- 
C, 
mL 
which is shown by the solid line in Fig. 5. With this figure we can tell whether pore 
diffusion modifies the rate of reaction, and inspection shows that this depends on 
whether mL is large or small. 
For small mL, or mL < 0.4, we see that & = 1, the concentration of reactant 
does not drop appreciably within the pore; thus pore diffusion offers negligible 
resistance. This can also be verified by noting that a small value for mL = 
L 
means either a short pore, slow reaction, or rapid diffusion, all three 
factors tending to lower the resistance to diffusion. 
For large mL, or mL > 4, we find that G = llmL, the reactant concentration 
drops rapidly to zero on moving into the pore, hence diffusion strongly influences 
the rate of reaction. We call this the regime of strong pore resistance. 
18.3 POROUS CATALYST PARTICLES 
The results for a single pore can approximate the behavior or particles of various 
shapes-spheres, cylinders, etc. For these systems the following apply. 
1. Use of the proper diffusion cog$cient. Replace the molecular diffusion 
coefficient CB by the effective diffusion coefficient of fluid in the porous 
structure. Representative gk values for gases and liquids in porous solids 
are given by Weisz (1959). 
2. Proper measure of particle size. To find the effective distance penetrated 


=== PDF PAGE 402 ===
386 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
by gas to get to all the interior surfaces we define a characteristic size 
of particle 
volume of particle 
, any particle shape 
= lexterior surface available 
I 
{for reactant penetration / 
thickness , for flat plates 
L 
= -, for cylinders 
I 
= f, 
for spheres 
3. Measures of reactions rates. In catalytic systems the rate of reaction can 
be expressed in one of many equivalent ways. For example, for first-or- 
der kinetics 
Based on volume of 
ldNA-kG,[ mols reacted 
voids in the reactor 
-rA= 
V dt 
m3 voids. s 
Based on weight of 
1 dNA 
-ra = - -- - 
mol reacted 
catalyst pellets 
W dt - ktCA, [ kgcat.s ] 
(15) 
1 dNA 
mol reacted 
Based on catalyst surface - r l  = - - - 
- 
S dt - kUCA, m2 cat. surf. - s 
Based on volume of 
1 dNA 
mol reacted 
catalyst pellets 
-rlkl= 
V, dt - P C A , [  m3 solid. s ] 
(17) 
Based on total reactor 
1 d
N
~
 mol reacted 
volume 
-rT= 
V, dt 
m3 reactor s 
Use whichever definition is convenient. However, for porous catalyst parti- 
cles rates based on unit mass and on unit volume of particles, r' and r"' are 
the useful measures. Hence for nth order reactions 
mol A 
(m3 gas)" 
r 
(kg cat). s ] = k l C y w h e r e k ' =  [(rnol A)"l (kg cat) - s 1 
(19) 
mol A 
(m3 gas)" 
-I; 
cat) . s] = k"'Cy where k" = (mol A)"-l (m3 cat) . s I 
4. In a manner similar to what was done for a single cylindrical pore, Thiele 


=== PDF PAGE 403 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 387 
(1939) and Aris (1957) related dwith MT for the various particle shapes as 
follows: 
- 1 
- - 
. tanh MT 
MT 
- 
- -. 1 
Il(2MT) 
MT 
z~(2MT) 
1 1 
1 
- 
- 
MT ' (tanh 3MT - %) 
where 
These relationships are shown in Fig. 18.6. If you know ge, k"', and L you can 
find the reaction rate from MT and Fig. 18.6. However, what if you want to 
evaluate k from an experiment in which you measure a rate which could have 
been slowed by diffusional resistance, but which you are unsure of? 
Thiele modulus: MT = ~dk"'19, 
Figure 18.6 Effectiveness factor versus MT for porous particles of various shapes. 


=== PDF PAGE 404 ===
388 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
5. Finding pore resistance effects from experiment. Here we have a simple 
trick to help us. Define another modulus which only includes observable 
and measurable quantities. This is known as the Wagner-Weisz-Wheeler 
modulus Mw (lucky for us that the three researchers who first dealt with 
this problem had last names all starting with the same letter). 
We shall call this the Wagner modulus. 
6. Pore resistance limits. When reactant fully penetrates the particle and 
bathes all its surfaces, then the particle is in the diffusion free regime. This 
occurs when MT < 0.4 or Mw < 0.15. 
At the other extreme when the center of the particle is starved for reactant 
and is unused then the particle is in the strong pore resistance regime. This 
occurs when MT > 4 or Mw > 4. 
Figures 18.6 and 18.7 show these limits. 
7. Particles of Different Sizes. Comparing the behavior of particles of size R, 
and R2 we find in the diffusion-free regime 
In the regime of strong diffusion resistance 
Thus the rate varies inversely proportional to the particle size. 
M~ 
M~ 
Figure 18.7 Shows the limits for negligible and for strong pore diffusion resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 405 ===
18.3 Porous Catalyst Particles 389 
Extensions 
There are many extensions to this basic treatment. Here we just mention a few. 
Mixture of Particles of Various Shapes and Sizes. For a catalyst bed consisting 
of a mixture of particles of various shapes and sizes Aris (1957) showed that the 
correct mean effectiveness factor is 
where f;, 
f ; ,  . . . are the volume fractions of particles of sizes 1, 2, . . . in 
the mixture. 
Molar Volume Change. With decrease in fluid density (expansion) during reac- 
tion the increased outflow of molecules from the pores makes it harder for 
reactants to diffuse into the pore, hence lowering d On the other hand, volumetric 
contraction results in a net molar flow into the pore, hence increasing k For a 
first-order reaction Thiele (1939) found that this flow simply shifted the d versus 
M ,  curve as shown in Fig. 18.5. 
Arbitrary Reaction Kinetics. If the Thiele modulus is generalized as follows 
[see Froment and Bischoff (1962)l 
then the &versus M ,  curves for all forms of rate equation closely follow the 
curve for the first-order reaction. This generalized modulus becomes 
for first-order reversible reactions 
for nth-order irreversible reactions 
nth-order reactions behave in an unexpected way in the region of strong pore 
resistance. Combining the nth-order rate with the generalized modulus of Eq. 


=== PDF PAGE 406 ===
390 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
28 we obtain 
Thus, in the regime of strong pore diffusion, an nth-order reaction 
behaves like a reaction of order (n + 1)/2 or 
0 order becomes % order 
1st order remains 1st order 
2nd order becomes 1.5 order 
3rd order becomes 2nd order 
In addition the temperature dependency of reactions is affected by strong pore 
resistance. From Eq. 29 the observed rate constant for nth-order reactions is 
Taking logarithms and differentiating with respect to temperature and noting 
that both the reaction rate and to a lesser extent the diffusional process are 
temperature-dependent gives 
With Arrhenius temperature dependencies for both reaction and diffusion we 
have 
and replacing in Eq. 31 gives 
Since the activation energy for gas-phase reactions is normally rather high, say 
80 - 240 kJ, while that for diffusion is small (about 5 kJ at room temperature 
or 15 kJ at 1000"C), we can write approximately 
, 
Etrue 
E 
=- 
obs 
2 


=== PDF PAGE 407 ===
18.4 Heat Effects during Reaction 391 
These results show that the observed activation energy for reactions influenced 
by strong pore resistance is approximately one-half the true activation energy. 
Summary-Diffusion Resistance in Pores 
For first-order surface reaction we summarize our finding in compact form in 
Eq. 34. 
this flat plate 
= 1 for no 
expression is a good 
rate without any 
diffusion 
approximation for all 
diffusion effects I;;/ 
resistance 
particle shapes 
tanhM, 
-ri 
= k c A s &  ... with ... 
&= --- 
MT 
effective diffusion 
coefficient in porous 
solids; m3 gaslm so1id.s 
~ ~ ( - r i ' , , d  
C~,obs 
g e  
&'= effectiveness factor, 
MT = Thiele modulus, 
Mw = Weisz modulus, 
a fudge factor 
useful for predicting 
useful for interpreting 
which varies betwen 0 
reactor behavior from 
experiments since it 
and 1, and which accounts 
known kinetic infor- 
only includes observables 
for the resistance to pore 
mation, thus known k '  
diffusion 
To find how pore resistance influences the rate evaluate MT or Mw, then find 
&from the above equations or figures, and insert &into the rate equation. 
Desirable processing range: Fine solids are free of pore diffusion resistance 
but are difficult to use (imagine the pressure drop of a packed bed of face 
powder). On the other hand a bed of large particles have a small Ap but are 
liable to be in the regime of strong pore diffusion where much of the pellets' 
interior is unused. 
For most effective operations what we want is to use the largest particle size 
which is still free of diffusional resistance or 
18.4 HEAT EFFECTS DURING REACTION 
When reaction is so fast that the heat released (or absorbed) in the pellet cannot 
be removed rapidly enough to keep the pellet close to the temperature of the 
fluid, then nonisothermal effects intrude. In such a situation two different kinds 
of temperature effects may be encountered: 
Within-particle AT. There may be a temperature variation within the pellet. 
Film AT. The pellet may be hotter (or colder) than the surrounding fluid. 


=== PDF PAGE 408 ===
392 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
For exothermic reaction, heat is released and particles are hotter than the sur- 
rounding fluid, hence the nonisothermal rate is always higher than the isothermal 
rate as measured by the bulk stream conditions. However, for endothermic 
reactions the nonisothermal rate is lower than the isothermal rate because the 
particle is cooler than the surrounding fluid. 
Thus our first conclusion: if the harmful effects of thermal shock, or sintering 
of the catalyst surface, or drop in selectivity, do not occur with hot particles, 
then we would encourage nonisothermal behavior in exothermic reactions. On 
the other hand, we would like to depress such behavior for endothermic reactions. 
We next ask which form of nonisothermal effect, if any, may be present. The 
following simple calculations tell. 
ForJilm AT we equate the rate of heat removal through the film with the rate 
of heat generation by reaction within the pellet. Thus 
and on combining we find 
where L is the characteristic size of the pellet. 
For within-particle AT the simple analysis by Prater (1958) for any particle 
geometry and kinetics gives the desired expression. Since the temperature and 
concentration within the particle are represented by the same form of differential 
equation (Laplace equation) Prater showed that the T and CA distributions must 
have the same shape; thus at any point in the pellet x 
and for the pellet as a whole 
where ke, is the effective thermal conductivity within the pellet. 
For temperature gradients within particles the corresponding nonisothermal 
effective factor curves have been calculated by Carberry (1961), Weisz and Hicks 
(1962), and others [see Bischoff (1967) for references]. Figure 18.8 illustrates 
these curves in dimensionless form, and shows that the shape is very similar to 
the isothermal curve of Fig. 18.6 with the following exception. For exothermic 
reactions only, where pore resistance just begins to intrude, the effectiveness 
factor can become greater than unity. This finding is not unexpected in light of 
the above discussion. 


=== PDF PAGE 409 ===
18.5 Performance Equations for Reactions Containing Porous Catalyst Particles 393 
10 
Generalized Thiele modulus of Eq. 26 
Figure 18.8 Nonisothermal effectiveness factor curve for temper- 
ature variation within the particle. Adapted from Bischoff (1967). 
However, for gas-solid systems Hutchings and Carberry (1966) and McGreavy 
and coworkers (1969, 1970) show that if reaction is fast enough to introduce 
nonisothermal effects, then the temperature gradient occurs primarily across the 
gas film, not within the particle. Thus we may expect to find a significant film 
AT, before any within-particle AT becomes evident. 
For detailed versions of Fig. 18.8 which show Bversus M ,  and 8 
versus Mw 
plus discussion and problems dealing with nonisothermal reactors, see Chapter 
22 in Levenspiel (1996). 
18.5 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR REACTORS CONTAINING 
POROUS CATALYST PARTICLES 
For Plug Flow. Take a thin slice of the PFR. Then following the analysis of 
Chapter 5 for homogeneous reactions we have the situation shown in Fig. 18.9. 
lj 
FA. 
In = FAO 
(1-XA. in) 9 
Volume of catalyst, AV, 
Moles A reactedls, 
Volume of catalyst, AV, 
Moles A reactedls, 
Figure 18.9 Elementary slice of solid catalyzed plug flow re- 
actor. 


=== PDF PAGE 410 ===
394 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
At steady state a material balance for reactant A gives 
input = output + accumulation . . . - 
in symbols 
F
~
O
 - F
~
~
X
~
i
n
 
= F~~ - F ~ ~ X ~ o u t  
+ (-ra) AW 
In differential form 
FAo dXA = (-ra) dW = (-rz) dVs 
Integrating over the whole reactor gives 
Note the similarity of this equation with Eq. 5.13 for homogeneous reactions. 
To bring this analogy closer let 
We have no name,for these two measures but if we wanted to we could call 
them by the ugly terms weight-time, and volume-time, respectively. So for first- 
order catalytic reactions Eq. 41 becomes 
For Mixed Flow. Here we have, following the analysis of Chapter 5, for any 
EA value 
For first-order reactions with CAin = CAo, and E ,  Z 0 


=== PDF PAGE 411 ===
18.5 Performance Equations for Reactions Containing Porous Catalyst Particles 395 
Gas and 
.
.
,
 
solids 
Solids 
Gas 
Gas 
Figure 18.10 Catalytic reactors where solid fraction f varies with 
height. 
For a Reactor Containing a Batch of Catalyst and a Batch of Gas 
Extensions of the Simple Performance Equations. There are numerous applica- 
tions of catalytic reactions where the fraction of solids f varies with height z in 
the reactor (see Fig. 18.10). 
For these situations the performance equations could more usefully be written 
differently. With uo as the superficial gas velocity (velocity if solids are absent) 
through the vertical reactor, Fig. 18.11 shows what happens in a thin slice through 
the reactor. A steady-state material balance gives 
Input of A = output of A + disappearance of A 
Cross-sectional 
FA out = ~ O A C A O  
(1-XA out) 
area, A 
Volume of solids in the 
lernent, fAAz [m3solidsl 
Reaction in the element 
-rrf AAz [molls] 
FA in = uOACAO (1-XA 
Figure 18.11 Section of catalytic reactor which has a solid frac- 
tion f. 


=== PDF PAGE 412 ===
396 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
In symbols 
In differential form 
Integrating 
For first-order reactions this expression reduces to 
For the special case where E, = 0, f is constant, and the height of catalyst bed 
is H, we have 
The original derivation leading to Eqs. 40 to 47 is used in the next chapter on 
packed beds. The extension leading to Eqs. 48 to 51 is used in Chapter 20, when 
dealing with suspended solids reactors. 
18.6 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS FOR FINDING RATES 
Any type of reactor with known contacting pattern may be used to explore the 
kinetics of catalytic reactions. Since only one fluid phase is present in these 
reactions, the rates can be found as with homogeneous reactions. The only special 
precaution to observe is to make sure that the performance equation used is 
dimensionally correct and that its terms are carefully and precisely defined. 
The experimental strategy in studying catalytic kinetics usually involves mea- 
suring the extent of conversion of gas passing in steady flow through a batch of 
solids. Any flow pattern can be used, as long as the pattern selected is known; 
if it is not known then the kinetics cannot be found. A batch reactor can also 
be used. In turn we discuss the following experimental devices: 
Differential (flow) reactor 
Integral (plug flow) reactor 
Mixed flow reactor 
Batch reactor for both gas and solid 


=== PDF PAGE 413 ===
18.6 
Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 397 
Differential Reactor. We have a differential flow reactor when we choose to 
consider the rate to be constant at all points within the reactor. Since rates are 
concentration-dependent this assumption is usually reasonable only for small 
conversions or for shallow small reactors. But this is not necessarily so, e.g., for 
slow reactions where the reactor can be large, or for zero-order kinetics where 
the composition change can be large. 
For each run in a differential reactor the plug flow performance equation be- 
comes 
from which the average rate for each run is found. Thus each run gives directly 
a value for the rate at the average concentration in the reactor, and a series of 
runs gives a set of rate-concentration data which can then be analyzed for a 
rate equation. 
Example 18.2 illustrates the suggested procedure. 
Integral Reactor. When the variation in reaction rate within a reactor is so 
large that we choose to account for these variations in the method of analysis, 
then we have an integral reactor. Since rates are concentration-dependent, such 
large variations in rate may be expected to occur when the composition of 
reactant fluid changes significantly in passing through the reactor. We may follow 
one of two procedures in searching for a rate equation. 
Integral Analysis. Here a specific mechanism with its corresponding rate equa- 
tion is put to the test by integrating the basic performance equation to give, 
similar to Eq. 5.17, 
Equations 5.20 and 5.23 are the integrated forms of Eq. 5.17 for simple kinetic 
equations, and Example 1 8 . 3 ~  
illustrates this procedure. 
Differential Analysis. Integral analysis provides a straightforward rapid proce- 
dure for testing some of the simpler rate expressions. However, the integrated 
forms of these expressions become unwieldy with more complicated rate expres- 
sions. In these situations, the differential method of analysis becomes more 
convenient. The procedure is closely analogous to the differential method de- 
scribed in Chapter 3. So, by differentiating Eq. 53 we obtain 
Example 18.3b illustrates this procedure. 


=== PDF PAGE 414 ===
398 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Inverted cup 
Four rapidly spinning 
wire baskets containing 
catalyst pellets, W 
F ~ O v  X ~ i n r  C ~ i n  
Spinning 
shaft 
Figure 18.12 Sketch of a Carberry basket-type experimental mixed 
flow reactor. 
Mixed Flow Reactor. A mixed flow reactor requires a uniform composition of 
fluid throughout, and although it may seem difficult at first thought to approach 
this ideal with gas-solid systems (except for differential contacting), such con- 
tacting is in fact practical. One simple experimental device which closely ap- 
proaches this ideal has been devised by Carberry (1964). It is called the basket- 
type mixed pow reactor, and it is illustrated in Fig. 18.12. References to design 
variations and uses of basket reactors are given by Carberry (1969). Another 
device for approaching mixed flow is the design developed by Berty (1974), and 
illustrated in Fig. 18.13. Still another design is that of a recycle reactor with 
R = m. This is considered in the next section. 
For the mixed flow reactor the performance equation becomes 
Feed 
Spinning 
shaft 
Figure 18.13 Principle of the Berty experimen- 
tal mixed flow reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 415 ===
18.6 Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 399 
from which the rate is 
Thus each run gives directly a value for the rate at the composition of the exit fluid. 
Examples 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3 and 18.6 show how to treat such data. 
Recycle Reactor. As with integral analysis of an integral reactor, when we use 
a recycle reactor we must put a specific kinetic equation to the test. The procedure 
requires inserting the kinetic equation into the performance equation for recy- 
cle reactors 
and integrating. Then a plot of the left- versus right-hand side of the equation 
tests for linearity. Figure 18.14 sketches an experimental recycle reactor. 
Unfortunately such data would be difficult to interpret when done using a low 
or intermediate recycle ratio. So we ignore this regime. But with a large enough 
recycle ratio mixed flow is approached, in which case the methods of the mixed 
flow reactor (direct evaluation of rate from each run) can be used. Thus a high 
recycle ratio provides a way of approximating mixed flow with what is essentially 
a plug flow device. But be warned, the problems of deciding how large a recycle 
ratio is large enough can be serious. Wedel and Villadsen (1983) and Broucek 
(1983) discuss the limitation of this reactor. 
F I U ~  
in, 
XAi" = 0 
Figure 18.14 Experimental recycle re- 
actor. When the recycle ratio is large 
enough mixed flow is closely approxi- 
mated. 


=== PDF PAGE 416 ===
400 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Follow change 
of composition 
with time 
Catalyst W 
Small composition 
change across 
reactor 
Figure 18.15 Batch reactor (batch of catalyst and batch of fluid) for cata- 
lytic reactions. 
Batch Reactor. Figure 18.15 sketches the main features of an experimental 
reactor which uses a batch of catalyst and a batch of fluid. In this system we 
follow the changing composition with time and interpret the results with the 
batch reactor performance equation. 
The procedure is analogous with the homogeneous batch reactor. To ensure 
meaningful results, the composition of fluid must be uniform throughout the 
system at any instant. This requires that the conversion per pass across the 
catalyst be small. 
A recycle reactor without through-flow becomes a batch reactor. This type of 
batch reactor was used by Butt et al. (1962). 
Comparison of Experimental Reactors 
1. The integral reactor can have significant temperature variations from point 
to point, especially with gas-solid systems, even with cooling at the walls. 
This could well make kinetic measurements from such a reactor completely 
worthless when searching for rate expressions. The basket reactor is best 
in this respect. 
2. The integral reactor is useful for modeling the operations of larger packed 
bed units with all their heat and mass transfer effects, particularly for systems 
where the feed and product consist of a variety of materials. 
3. Since the differential and mixed flow reactors give the rate directly they 
are more useful in analyzing complex reacting systems. The test for anything 
but a simple kinetic form can become awkward and impractical with the 
integral reactor. 
4. The small conversions needed in differential reactors require more accurate 
measurements of composition than the other reactor types. 
5. The recycle reactor with large recycle acts as a mixed flow reactor and 
shares its advantages. Actually, to minimize heat effects the catalyst need 
not be all at one location, but can be distributed throughout the recycle loop. 


=== PDF PAGE 417 ===
18.6 Experimental Methods for Finding Rates 401 
6. In exploring the physical factors of heat and mass transfer, the integral 
reactor most closely models the larger fixed bed; however, the basket, 
recycle, and batch GIS reactors are more suited for finding the limits for 
such heat effects, for avoiding the regime where these effects intrude, and 
for studying the kinetics of the reaction unhindered by these phenomena. 
7. The batch GIS reactor, like the integral reactor, gives cumulative effects, 
thus is useful for following the progress of multiple reactions. In these 
reactors it is easier to study reactions free from heat and mass transfer 
resistances (simply increase the circulation rate), and it is also simple to 
slow down the progress of reactions (use a larger batch of fluid, or less 
catalyst); however, direct modeling of the packed bed with all its complexi- 
ties is best done with the integral flow reactor. 
8. Because of the ease in interpreting its results the mixed flow reactor is 
probably the most attractive device for studying the kinetics of solid cata- 
lyzed reactions. 
Determining Controlling Resistances and the Rate Equation 
Interpretation of experiments becomes difficult when more than one resistance 
affects the rate. To avoid this problem we should like, with preliminary runs, to 
first find the limits of operations where the various resistances become important. 
This will allow us to select conditions of operations in which the resistances can 
be studied separately. 
Film Resistance. First of all, it is best to see whether film resistance of any 
kind (for mass or heat transfer) need be considered. This can be done in a 
number of ways. 
1. Experiments can be devised to see whether the conversion changes at 
different gas velocities but at identical weight-time. This is done by using 
different amounts of catalyst in integral or differential reactors for identical 
values for weight-time, by changing the spinning rate in basket reactors, or 
by changing the circulation rate in recycle or batch reactors. 
2. If data are available we can calculate whether film resistance to heat transfer 
is important by the estimate of Eq. 36., and whether film resistance to mass 
transport is important by comparing the observed first-order rate constant 
based on the volume of particle with the mass transfer coefficient for that 
type of flow. 
For fluid moving past a single particle at relative velocity u Froessling 
(1938) gives 
while for fluid passing through a packed bed of particles Ranz (1952) gives 


=== PDF PAGE 418 ===
402 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Thus we have roughly 
1 
kg - - 
for small dp and u 
dP 
u112 
kg - - for large d, and u 
dki2 
Thus to see whether film mass transfer resistance is important compare 
k rb,Vp versus kg&, 
(58) 
If the two terms are of the same order of magnitude we may suspect that the 
gas film resistance affects the rate. On the other hand, if k,,,V, is much smaller 
than kg$,, we may ignore the resistance to mass transport through the film. 
Example 18.1 illustrate this type of calculation. The results of that example 
confirm our earlier statement that film mass transfer resistance is unlikely to 
play a role with porous catalyst. 
Nonisothermal Effects. We may expect temperature gradients to occur either 
across the gas film or within the particle. However, the previous discussion 
indicates that for gas-solid systems the most likely effect to intrude on the rate 
will be the temperature gradient across the gas film. Consequently, if experiment 
shows that gas film resistance is absent then we may expect the particle to be 
at the temperature of its surrounding fluid; hence, isothermal conditions may be 
assumed to prevail. Again see Example 18.1. 
Pore Resistance. The effectiveness factor accounts for this resistance. Thus, 
based on unit mass of catalyst we have 
where 
The existence of pore resistance can be determined by 
1. Calculation if CZJe is known. 
2. Comparing rates for different pellet sizes. 
3. Noting the drop in activation energy of the reaction with rise in temperature, 
coupled with a possible change in reaction order. 
18.7 PRODUCT DISTRIBUTION IN MULTIPLE REACTIONS 
More often than not, solid-catalyzed reactions are multiple reactions. Of the 
variety of products formed, usually only one is desired, and it is the yield of this 
material which is to be maximized. In cases such as these the question of product 
distribution is of primary importance. 
Here we examine how strong pore diffusion modifies the true instantaneous 
fractional yield for various types of reactions; however, we leave to Chapter 7 


=== PDF PAGE 419 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 403 
the calculation of the overall fractional yield in reactors with their particular 
flow patterns of fluid. In addition, we will not consider film resistance to mass 
transfer since this effect is unlikely to influence the rate. 
Decomposition of a Single Reactant by Two Paths 
N o  resistance to pore diffusion. Consider the parallel-path decomposition 
R (desired), 
r~ = klC2 
f 
A, \ S (unwanted), 
rs = k2Ci2 
Here the instantaneous fractional yield at any element of catalyst surface is 
given by 
or for first-order reactions 
1 
= 1 + (k21kl) 
Strong resistance to pore diffusion. Under these conditions we have 
and with Eq. 29 
4 g e  
(a, + a, + 2)(k1 + k2)C2i1 
Using a similar expression for r, and replacing both of these into the defining 
equation for cp gives 
- r~ - 
- 
1 
PO~S 
- - 
r + r - 1 + (k21k,)Cg-al)" 
and for equal-order or for first-order reactions 
This result is expected since the rules in Chapter 7 suggest that the product 
distribution for competing reactions of same order should be unaffected by 
changing concentration of A in the pores or in the reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 420 ===
404 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Reactions in Series 
As characteristic of reactions in which the desired product can decompose further, 
consider the successive first-order decompositions 
When CA does not drop in the interior of catalyst particles, true rates are ob- 
served. thus 
- 
(~obs -  true 
or 
(5) = (5) 
kl obs 
kl true 
Strong resistance to pore diffusion. An analysis similar to that starting with 
Eq. 2 using the appropriate kinetic rate expressions gives the concentration ratio 
of materials in the main gas stream (or pore mouths) at any point in the reactor. 
Thus the differential expression (see Wheeler, 1951 for details) is 
For mixed flow with CA going from CAo to CA, Eq. 65 with CRo = 0 gives 
For plug flow, integration with CRo = 0 gives 
Comparing Eqs. 66 and 67 with the corresponding expressions for no resistance 
in pores, Eqs. 8.41 and 8.37, shows that here the distributions of A and R are 
given by a reaction having the square root of the true k ratio, with the added 
modification that CRg is divided by 1 + y. The maximum yield of R is likewise 
affected. Thus for plug flow Eq. 8.8 or 8.38 is modified to give 
and for mixed flow Eq. 8.15 or 8.41 is modified to give 
Table 18.2 shows that the yield of R is about halved in the presence of strong 
resistance to diffusion in the pores. 


=== PDF PAGE 421 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 405 
Table 18.2 The Role of Diffusion in Pores for First-Order Reactions in Series 
CRg,,,,/CAo for Plug Flow 
CRg,,,ICAo for Mixed Flow 
No 
Strong 
Percent 
No 
Strong 
Percent 
k,/k, 
Resistance 
Resistance 
Decrease 
Resistance 
Resistance 
Decrease 
1 164 
0.936 
0.650 
30.6 
0.790 
0.486 
38.5 
1/16 
0.831 
0.504 
39.3 
0.640 
0.356 
44.5 
1 I4 
0.630 
0.333 
47.6 
0.444 
0.229 
48.5 
1 
0.368 
0.184 
50.0 
0.250 
0.125 
50.0 
4 
0.157 
0.083 
47.2 
0.111 
0.057 
48.5 
16 
0.051 
0.031 
38.2 
0.040 
0.022 
44.5 
For more on the whole subject of the shift in product distribution caused by 
diffusional effects, see Wheeler (1951). 
Extensions to Real Catalysts 
So far we have considered catalyst pellets having only one size of pore. Real 
catalysts, however, have pores of various sizes. A good example of this are the 
pellets prepared by compressing a porous powder. Here there are large openings 
between the agglomerated particles and small pores within each particle. As a 
first approximation we may represent this structure by two pore sizes as shown 
in Fig. 18.16. If we define the degree of branching of a porous structure by a where 
a = 0 represents a nonporous particle 
a = 1 represents a particle with one size of pore 
a = 2 represents a particle with two pore sizes 
then every real porous pellet can be characterized by some value of a. 
Model of pore structure 
porous powder 
Figure 18.16 Porous structure with two sizes of pores as a model for a pellet of compressed 
porous powder. 


=== PDF PAGE 422 ===
406 
Chapter I8 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Now for strong pore diffusion in one size of pore we already know that the 
observed order of reaction, activation energy, and k ratio for multiple reactions 
will differ from the true value. Thus from Eqs. 30 and 32 
1 
1 
Eobs = - Ediff + - E 
2 
2 
n  - 1 
2 
(5) = (?)In 
. - - for side-by-side reactions 
kl obs 
Carberry (1962a, b), Tartarelli (1968), and others have extended this type of 
analysis to other values of a and to reversible reactions. Thus for two sizes of 
pores, where reaction occurs primarily in the smaller pores (because of much 
more area there), while both sizes of pores offer strong pore diffusional resistance, 
we find 
n - 1  
4 
- - . for side-by-side reactions 
More generally for an arbitrary porous structure 
[(2),, 
= (2)'l2' 
- 
for side-by-side reactions 
These findings show that for large a, diffusion plays an increasingly important 
role, in that the observed activation energy decreases to that of diffusion, and the 
reaction order approaches unity. So, for a given porous structure with unknown a, 
the only reliable estimate of the true k ratio would be from experiments under 
conditions where pore diffusion is unimportant. On the other hand, finding the 
experimental ratio of k values under both strong and negligible pore resistance 
should yield the value of a. This in turn should shed light on the pore structure 
geometry of the catalyst. 


=== PDF PAGE 423 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 407 
SEARCH OF THE RATE-CONTROLLING MECHANISM 
An experimental rate measurement on the decomposition of A is made with a 
particular catalyst (see pertinent data listed below). 
(a) Is it likely that film resistance to mass transfer influences the rate? 
(b) Could this run have been made in the regime of strong pore diffusion? 
(c) Would you expect to have temperature variations within the pellet or 
across the gas film? 
Data 
For the spherical particle: 
dp = 2.4mmorL = R/3 =0.4mm = 4 X  10-4mcat 
C2Je = 5 x 
m3/hr. m cat (effective mass conductivity) 
k,, = 1.6 kJ/hr. m cat - K (effective thermal conductivity) 
For the gas film surrounding the pellet (from correlations in the literature): 
h = 160 kJ/hr. m2 cat K (heat transfer coefficient) 
kg = 300 m3/hr. m2 cat (mass transfer coefficient) 
I 
For the reaction: 
AH, = -160 kJ/mol A (exothermic) 
CAg = 20 mol/m3 (at 1 atm and 336°C) 
-rT,obs = lo5 mollhr . m3 cat 
Assume that the reaction is first order. 
I SOLUTION 
(a) Film mass transfer. From Eq. 58, and introducing numerical values, we 
obtain 
observed rate 
kr'r V 
(-r'rr 
- obs p - 
A, obs/C~g)(nd;/6) - 
-- -YZ, 
obs . dp 
rate if film resistance controls 
kg&, 
kg(ndi) 
c~gkg 6 
- 
- 
lo5 mol/hr. m3 cat 
2.4 X 
m cat 
(20 mol/m3)(300 m3/hr. m2 cat) ' 
6 
I 
The observed rate is very much lower than the limiting film mass transfer rate. 


=== PDF PAGE 424 ===
408 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Thus the resistance to film mass transfer certainly should not influence the 
rate of reaction. 
(b) Strong pore diffusion. Equations 24 and Fig. 18.7 test for strong pore 
diffusion. Thus 
This quantity Mw is greater than 4, hence pore diffusion is influencing and 
slowing the rate of reaction. 
(c) Nonisothermaloperations. The estimate for the upper limit to temperature 
variations is given by Eqs. 38 and 36. Thus within the pellet 
- 
- (5 X 
m3/hr. m cat)(20 mol/m3)(160 kJ/mol) 
(1.6 kJ/hr. m cat. K) 
Across the gas film 
These estimates show that the pellet is close to uniform in temperature, but 
could well be hotter than the surrounding fluid. 
The findings of this example use coefficients close to those observed in real 
gas-solid systems (see the appendix), and the conclusions verify the discussion 
of this chapter. 
THE RATE EQUATION FROM A DIFFERENTIAL REACTOR 
The catalytic reaction 
is run at 3.2 atm and 117°C in a plug flow reactor which contains 0.01 kg of 
catalyst and uses a feed consisting of the partially converted product of 20 liters/ 
hr of pure unreacted A. The results are as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 425 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 409 
and 
Run 
1 
2 
3 
4 
CAin , mollliter 
CA ,, mollliter 
0.100 
0.080 
0.060 
0.040 
0.084 
0.070 
0.055 
0.038 
Find a rate equation to represent this reaction. 
SOLUTION 
Since the maximum variation about the mean concentration is 8% (run I), we 
may consider this to be a differential reactor and we may apply Eq. 52 to find 
the reaction rate. 
Basing conversion for all runs on pure A at 3.2 atm and 117"C, we have 
c - N~~ -PAO - 
3.2 atm 
mol 
AO- v 
= 0.1 - 
RT (0.082 liter atmlmol . K)(390 K) 
liter 
F - C  
molA 
liters 
mol 
Ao- 
Aov=(~-lter)(2~lr)=2G 
Because the density changes during reaction, concentrations and conversions are 
related by 
CA - 1 - X A  
-- 
1 - CAICAo 
or 
X, = 
CAO 1 + EAXA 
1 + EA(CAICAO) 
where EA = 3 for the basis selected (pure A). 
Table E18.2 shows the details of the calculations. Plotting - r i  versus CA as 
shown in Fig. E18.2 gives a straight line through the origin, indicating a first- 
Table E18.2 
X ~ i n  = 
x ~ o u t  = 
C ~ i n  
I-- 
C ~ o u t  
I-- 
c~~ 
c~~ 
C ~ i n  
C ~ o u t  
- - c ~ a v  
1 + e A p  
C ~ i n  
c ~ o u t  
A x A  = 
-r6 = - 
 ax^ 
CAO 
CA, 
mollliter 
CAO 
X
~
~
~
t
 
- X ~ i n  
WIFAO 
1 
1-1- 
1 - 0.84 
0.0455 
0.0455 9.1 
0.84 
0.092 
i--qj - 
= 0.0455 
-= 
O 
1 + 3(0.84) 
0.0112 
0.8 
0.70 
0.075 
0.0588 
0.0968 
0.0380 
7.6 
0.6 
0.55 
0.0575 
0.1429 
0.1698 
0.0269 
5.4 
0.4 
0.38 
0.039 
0.2727 
0.2897 
0.0171 
3.4 


=== PDF PAGE 426 ===
410 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
rnol 
CA, liter 
Figure E18.2 
order decomposition. The rate in terms of moles A reactedlhrekg cat is then 
found from this figure to be 
1 dNA 
liters )( 
m"l) 
= 
W dt 
hr.kgcat '*E 
THE RATE EQUATION FROM AN INTEGRAL REACTOR 
The catalytic reaction 
is studied in a plug flow reactor using various amounts of catalyst and 20 liters1 
hr of pure A feed at 3.2 atm and 117°C. The concentrations of A in the effluent 
stream is recorded for the various runs as follows. 
(a) Find the rate equation for this reaction, using the integral method of 
analysis 
(b) Repeat part (a), using the differential method of analysis. 
Run 
Catalyst used, kg 
CAout, mollliter 
1 
2 
3 
4 
0.020 
0.040 
0.080 
0.160 
0.074 
0.060 
0.044 
0.029 


=== PDF PAGE 427 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 411 
I SOLUTION 
(a) Integral Analysis. From Example 18.2 we have for all experimental runs 
Since the concentration varies significantly during the runs, the experimental 
reactor should be considered to be an integral reactor. 
As a first guess try a first-order rate expression. Then for plug flow Eq. 
44 gives 
c ~ ~ w  
1 
kt - 
= (1 + 
In- 
- &AXA 
FAO 
1 - XA 
and with cA, CAO, and FAo replaced by numerical values this becomes 
The two terms in parentheses should be proportional to each other with kt as 
the constant of proportionality. Evaluating these terms in Table E18.3a for 
Table E18.3a Calculations Needed to Test the Fit of Eq. (i); Integral Analysis 
the data points and plotting as in Fig. 18.3a, we see that there is no reason to 
suspect that we do not have a linear relationship. Hence we may conclude 
that the first-order rate equation satisfactorily fits the data. With kt evaluated 
from Fig. 18.3a, we then have 
liters 
= (95 hr.kgcat)(cA'm) 
(b) Differential Analysis. Equation 54 shows that the rate of reaction is given 
by the slope of the XA versus WIFAo curve. The tabulation (Table E18.3b) 
based on the measured slopes in Fig. E18.3b shows how the rate of reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 428 ===
412 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
CAOW 
w 
hr . kg cat 
- 
FAO - 20 ' 
liter 
Figure E18.3a 
Figure E18.3b 


=== PDF PAGE 429 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 413 
I 
Table E18.3b Calculations Used for the Differential Analysis 
(from Fig. E18.3b) 
unused 
5.62 
4.13 
2.715 
rnol 
CA, - 
liter 
Figure E18.3~ 
is found at various C,. The linear relation between - r i  and CA in Fig. 
E18.3~ then gives for the rate equation: 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR SIZE FROM A RATE EQUATION 
Consider the catalytic reaction of Example 18.2. Using the rate equation found 
for this reaction determine the amount of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor 
(assume plug flow) for 35% conversion of A to R for a feed of 2000 mollhr of 
pure A at 3.2 atm and 117°C. 


=== PDF PAGE 430 ===
414 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
/ SOLUTION 
The amount of catalyst needed is given by the first-order rate expression for 
1 
plug flow, Eq. 44. Thus 
Replacing all the known values from Example 18.2 into this expression gives the 
final result, or 
mol A 
2000 - 
hr 
= ( 
liter )( md;) 
96 hr . kg cat 
0.1 - 
= 140 kg catalyst 
PLUG FLOW REACTOR SIZE FROM RATE 
CONCENTRATION DATA 
For the reaction of Example 18.2 suppose the following rate concentration data 
are available: 
CA , mollliter 
0.039 
0.0575 
0.075 
0.092 
- r i ,  mol Alhr . kg cat 
3.4 
5.4 
7.6 
9.1 
Directly from this data, and without using a rate equation, find the size of packed 
bed needed to treat 2000 mollhr of pure A at 117°C (or C,, 
= 0.1 mollliter, 
EA = 3) to 35% conversion, all at 3.2 atm. 
Note: Rate information such as this can be obtained from a differential reactor 
(see Table E18.2), or from other types of experimental reactors. 
SOLUTION 
To find the amount of catalyst needed without using an analytic expression for 
the rate concentration relationship requires graphical integration of the plug 
flow performance equation, or 
I 


=== PDF PAGE 431 ===
18.7 Product Distribution in Multiple Reactions 415 
Table E18.5 
- r6, 
1 - 
1 - CA/O.l 
X - 
(given) 
(given) 
A - 1 + 3CA/0.1 
The needed 11-ra versus X, data are determined in Table E18.5 and are plotted 
in Fig. E18.5. Integrating graphically then gives 
Hence 
hr - kg cat 
W = (2000 F) 
(0.0735 mol A 
- 
- 
= 147 kg cat 
"0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 0.35 
0.4 
XA, 
dimensionless 
Figure E18.5 


=== PDF PAGE 432 ===
416 
Chapter I8 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
i 4 P  
* * I ,  i 
, t *  s h  a =  
.- 
MIXED FLOW REACTOR SIZE 
For the reaction of Example 18.2 determine the amount of catalyst needed in a 
packed bed reactor with a very large recycle rate (assume mixed flow) for 35% 
conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 2000 mollhr of pure A at 3.2 atm and 
117°C. For the reaction at this temperature 
A +4R, 
- r i  = 96 C,, 
mollkg cat. hr 
From Example 18.2, CAo = 0.1 mollliter and E, = 3. 
SOLUTION 
At 35% conversion the concentration of reactant is 
1 - X, 
1 - 0.35 
= 'AO ( 1 + cAXA ) = 
+ 3(0.35)) = 0'0317 
Now for mixed flow Eq. 45 gives 
W - x
~
~
~
t
 
- 
x
~
l
~
 
- x ~ o u t  - x~~~ 
-- 
- 
F~~ 
- r iout 
Id C ~ ~ u t  
W = 2000 ( 0'35 - ) = 230 kg 
- 
96(0.0317) = 
Note: A mixed flow reactor requires more catalyst than does a plug flow reactor, 
as expected. 
1 EXAMPLE 18.7 
MASS TRANSFER RESISTANCES 
What is the most reasonable interpretation, in terms of controling resistances, 
of the kinetic data of Table E18.7 obtained in a basket type mixed flow reactor 
if we know that the catalyst is porous? Assume isothermal behavior. 
Table E18.7 
Leaving 
Spinning 
Measured 
Pellet 
Concentration 
Rate of 
Reaction 
Diameter 
of Reactant 
Baskets 
Rate, -rA 
1 
1 
high 
3 
3 
1 
low 
1 
3 
1 
high 
1 


=== PDF PAGE 433 ===
References 417 
Let us see whether film resistance or pore resistance could be slowing the rate 
of reaction. 
Runs 2 and 3 use different spinning rates but have the same reaction rate. 
Therefore film diffusion is ruled out for the larger pellets. But Eq. 57 shows that 
if film resistance is not important for large pellets it will not be important for 
small pellets. Therefore film resistance does not influence the rate. 
Next, comparing run 1 and either run 2 or 3 shows that 
Eq. 25 then tells us that we are in the regime of strong pore resistance. Thus 
our final conclusion is 
negligible film resistance 
strong pore diffusion resistance 
REFERENCES 
Aris, R., Chem. Eng. Sci., 6, 262 (1957). 
Berty, J., Chem. Eng. Prog., 70 (S), 78 (1974). 
Bischoff, K. B., Chem. Eng. Sci., 22, 525 (1967). 
Boudart, M., AIChE J., 2, 62 (1956). 
Broucek, R., Chem. Eng. Sci., 38, 1349 (1983). 
Butt, J. B., Bliss, H., and Walker, C. A., AIChE J., 8, 42 (1962). 
Carberry, J. J., AIChE J., 7, 350 (1961). 
, 
AIChE J., 8, 557 (1962a). 
, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 17,675 (1926b). 
, 
Ind. Eng. Chem., 56, 39 (Nov. 1964). 
, 
Catalysis Reviews, 3, 61 (1969). 
Chou, C. H., Znd. Eng. Chem., 50,799 (1958). 
Corrigan, T. E., Chem. Eng., 61,236 (November 1954); 61,198 (December 1954); 62,199 
(January 1955); 62,195 (February 1955); 62, 203 (May 1955); 62,227 (July 1955). 
Froessling, N., Gerland Beitr. Geophys., 52, 170 (1938). 
Froment, G. F., and Bischoff, K. B., Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, p. 162, John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1990. 
Hougen, 0. A., and Watson, K. M., Chemical Process Principles, Part 111, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 1947. 
Hutchings, J., and Carberry, J. J., AIChE J., 12, 20 (1966). 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Chap. 22, OSU Bookstore, Corvallis, 
OR, 1996. 
McGreavy, C., and Cresswell, D. L., Can. J. Ch.E., 47, 583 (1969a). 
, 
a
n
d
,
 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 24,608 (1969b). 
McGreavy, C., and Thornton, J. M., Can. J. Ch. E., 48, 187 (1970a). 
, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 25,303 (1970b). 
Prater, C. C., Chem. Eng. Sci., 8, 284 (1958). 
, 
and Lago, R. M., Advances in Catalysis, 8, 293 (1956). 


=== PDF PAGE 434 ===
418 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Ranz, W. E., Chem. Eng. Prog., 48,247 (1952). 
Satterfield, C. N., Mass Transfer in Heterogeneous Catalysis, M.I.T. Press, 1970. 
Tartarelli, R., Chim. Ind. (Milan), 50, 556 (1968). 
Thiele, E. W., Znd. Eng. Chem., 31, 916 (1939). 
Walas, S., Reaction Kinetics for Chemical Engineers, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959. 
Wedel, S., and Villadsen, J., Chem. Eng. Sci., 38, 1346 (1983). 
Weisz, P. B., Chem. Eng. Prog. Symp. Series, No. 25, 55, 29 (1959). 
, 
and Hicks, J. S., Chem. Eng. Sci., 17, 265 (1962). 
Weller, S., AIChE J., 2, 59 (1956). 
Wheeler, A., Advances in Catalysis, 3, 250 (1951). 
PROBLEMS 
These problems are loosely grouped as follows: 
Problems 1-19: Direct application of performance equations. These problems 
should be tried first. 
Problems 20-30: Pore diffusion kinetics. 
Problems 31-40: Reactor size + pore diffusion 
18.1. While being shown around Lumphead Laboratories, you stop to view a 
reactor used to obtain kinetic data. It consists of a 5-cm ID glass column 
packed with a 30-cm height of active catalyst. Is this a differential or 
integral reactor? 
18.2. A solid catalyzed first-order reaction, E = 0, takes place with 50% conver- 
sion in a basket type mixed reactor. What will be the conversion if the 
reactor size is trebled and all else-temperature, 
amount of catalyst, feed 
composition, and flow rate-remains 
unchanged? 
18.3. The following kinetic data on the reaction A -+ R are obtained in an 
experimental packed bed reactor using various amounts of catalyst and 
a fixed feed rate FA, = 10 kmollhr. 
(a) Find the reaction rate at 40% conversion. 
(b) In designing a large packed bed reactor with feed rate FA, = 400 
kmollhr how much catalyst would be needed for 40% conversion. 
(c) How much catalyst would be needed in part (b) if the reactor em- 
ployed a very large recycle of product stream. 
A gas containing A (2 mol/m3) is fed (1 m3/hr) to a plug flow reactor 
with recycle loop (0.02 m3 loop volume, 3 kg of catalyst), and the output 
composition from the reactor system is measured (0.5 mol A/m3). Find 
the rate equation for the decomposition of A for the following cases. Be 
sure to give the units of -ra, C,, 
and k' in your final expression. 


=== PDF PAGE 435 ===
Problems 419 
18.4. Very large recycle, A - 
R, n = 112 
18.5. Very large recycle, A -+ 3R, n = 1, 50% A-50% inerts in feed 
18.6. No recycle, A -+ 3R, n = 2, 25% A-75% inerts in feed 
Gaseous A reacts (A -t R) in an experimental reactor. From the following 
conversion data at various conditions find a rate equation to represent 
the reaction 
18.8. 
W, gm 
0.5 
1.0 2.5 
Plug flow 
CA, = 60 mol/m3 
CA 
30 
20 
10 
u = 3 literlmin 
u,, m3/hr 
XA 
The following kinetic data are obtained in an experimental Carberry type 
basket reactor using 100 gm of catalyst in the paddles and different flow 
rates from run to run: 
3 
2 
1.2 Mixed flow 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
0.2 
0.3 
0.5 
W = 4 gm 
A-R 
FAo,mol/min 
0.14 
0.42 
1.67 2.5 
1.25 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
CA, mol/m3 
8
6
4
2
1
 
18.9. Determine the amount of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor for 
75% conversion of 1000 mol Almin of a CAo = 8 mol/m3 feed. 
18.10. Find W for mixed flow, XA = 0.90, CAo = 10 mol/m3, FAo = 1000 mollmin. 
How much catalyst is needed in a packed bed reactor for 80% conversion 
of 1000 m3/hr of pure gaseous A (CAo = 100 mol/m3) if the stoichiometry 
and rate are given by 
A+R, -,a 
= 
50CA 
mol 
1 + 0.02CA kg. hr 
mol 
A-R, 
- r i  = 8 C i  - 
kg. hr 
18.13. Gaseous feed with A and B (u, = 10 m3/hr) pass through an experimental 
reactor packed with catalyst (W = 4 kg). Reaction occurs as follows: 
mol 
A + B + R + S ,  
-,A=o.~c c - 
A Bkg.hr 


=== PDF PAGE 436 ===
420 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Find the conversion of reactants if the feed contains CAo = 0.1 mol/m3 
and C, = 10 mol/m3. 
18.14. A West Texas gas oil is cracked in a tubular reactor packed with silica- 
alumina cracking catalyst. The liquid feed (mw = 0.255) is vaporized, 
heated, enters the reactor at 630°C and 1 atm, and with adequate tempera- 
ture control stays close to this temperature within the reactor. The cracking 
reaction follows first-order kinetics and gives a variety of products with 
mean molecular weight mw = 0.070. Half the feed is cracked for a feed 
rate of 60 m3 liquid/m3 reactor. hr. In the industry this measure of feed 
rate is called the liquid hourly space velocity. Thus LHSV = 60 hr-l. Find 
the first-order rate constants k' and kt" for this cracking reaction. 
Data: Density of liquid feed: p, = 869 kg/m3 
Bulk density of packed bed: p, = 700 kg/m3 
Density of catalyst particles: p, = 950 kg/m3 
This problem is prepared from Satterfield (1970). 
18.15. Kinetic experiments on the solid catalyzed reaction A -3R are conducted 
at 8 atm and 700°C in a basket type mixed reactor 960 cm3 in volume and 
containing 1 gm of catalyst of diameter d, = 3 mm. Feed consisting of 
pure A is introduced at various rates into the reactor and the partial 
pressure of A in the exit stream is measured for each feed rate. The results 
are as follows: 
Feed rate, literslhr 
100 
22 
4 
1 
0.6 
P Aoutlp Ain 
1 
0.8 
0.5 
0.2 
0.1 
0.05 
Find a rate equation to represent the rate of reaction on catalyst of this size. 
18.16. "El jefe" (the chief) decided to do something to improve the low conver- 
sion (XA = 0.80) of our first-order solid-catalyzed liquid-phase reaction. 
Instead of ordering more of the expensive catalyst to fill the half-empty 
reactor, he decided to save money by adding some tricky piping to the 
present vertical packed bed reactor. When I saw what the mechanics were 
putting together for him, (see Fig. P18.16), I told "el jefe" that it didn't 
seem right. I could sense right away that my saying this annoyed him, but 
all he said was, "All right, young lady. Why don't you tell me what 
conversion to expect with this arrangement?" Please do this. 
ug flow 
c,, 
= 100 
u, = 100 
Figure P18.16 


=== PDF PAGE 437 ===
Problems 421 
18.17. The second-order reaction A -+ R is studied in a recycle reactor with 
very large recycle ratio, and the following data are recorded: 
Void volume of reactor: 1 liter 
Weight of catalyst used: 3 gm 
Feed to the reactor: 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
u0 = 1 literlhr 
Exit stream condition: CAOut 
= 0.5 mollliter 
(a) Find the rate constant for this reaction (give units). 
(b) How much catalyst is needed in a packed bed reactor for 80% conver- 
sion of 1000 literlhr of feed of concentration CAo = 1 mollliter. No re- 
cycle. 
(c) Repeat part (b) if the reactor is packed with 1 part catalyst to 4 parts 
inert solid. This addition of inerts helps maintain isothermal conditions 
and reduce possible hot spots. 
Note: Assume isothermal conditions throughout. 
18.18. A small experimental packed bed reactor (W = 1 kg) using very large 
recycle of product stream gives the following kinetic data: 
A+R, 
CA,mol/m3 1 
2 
3 
6 
9 
CAo = 10 mol/m3 
v,, literlhr 
5 
20 
65 
133 540 
Find the amount of catalyst needed for 75% conversion for a flow rate of 
1000 mol A/hr of a CA, = 8 mol/m3 feed stream 
(a) in a packed bed reactor with no recycle of exit fluid 
(b) in a packed bed reactor with very high recycle 
18.19. A closed loop batch GIs reactor (see Fig. P18.19) is used for catalytic 
rate studies. For this purpose feed gas with reactant is introduced into 
the system and is rapidly circulated through the catalyst loop. From the 
following composition-time data find a kinetic equation in units of moll 
gm - min to represent this reaction. 
t, min 
0 
4 
8 
16 
36 
PureAat609K 
no atm 
1 0.75 
0.67 
0.6 
0.55 
2A+R 
Nonporous catalyst, 
2 gin, 1 crn3 bulk, 
void fraction = 0.5 
Figure P18.19 


=== PDF PAGE 438 ===
422 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
18.20. Our packed bed reactor runs the gas phase reaction A -+ R at 10 atm 
and 336"C, and gives 90% conversion of a pure A feed. However, the 
catalyst salesman guarantees that in the absence of any pore diffusion 
resistance our reaction will proceed on his new improved porous catalyst 
(ge = 2 X 
m3/m cat. s) with a rate given by 
mol 
-Y: 
= o.88cA m3 cat. 
which is much better than what we now can do. The catalyst is rather 
expensive, since it is formulated of compressed kookaburra droppings 
and it is sold by weight. Still, we'll try it when we next replace our catalyst. 
What diameter of catalyst balls should we order? 
18.21. A reaction A + R is to take place on a porous catalyst pellet (d, = 6 
mm, ge = 
m3/m cat. s). How much is the rate slowed by pore diffu- 
sional resistance if the concentration of reactant bathing the particle is 
100 mol/m3 and the diffusion-free kinetics are given by 
mol 
-rg = 0.1Ci- m3 cat. s 
18.22. In the absence of pore diffusion resistance a particular first-order gas- 
phase reaction proceeds as reported below. 
- rl" 
A - 
- 
mol/cm3 cat. s 
at 
CA = 
mol/cm3, 
at 1 atm and 400°C 
What size of spherical catalyst pellets (ge = 
cm3/cm cat as) would 
ensure that pore resistance effects do not intrude to slow the rate of re- 
action? 
The first-order decomposition of A is run in an experimental mixed flow 
reactor. Find the role played by pore diffusion in these runs; in effect 
determine whether the runs were made under diffusion-free, strong resis- 
tance, or intermediate conditions. 


=== PDF PAGE 439 ===
Problems 423 
18.26. Find the activation energy of the first-order reaction from the following 
data: 
18.27. What can you tell about the influencing resistances for the porous catalyst 
from the data of Table P18.27 obtained in a recycle type mixed flow 
reactor. In all runs the leaving stream has the same composition, and 
conditions are isothermal throughout. 
Table P18.27 
Measured 
Quantity of 
Pellet 
Flow Rate of 
Recycle 
Reaction 
Catalyst 
Diameter 
Given Feed 
Rate 
Rate, - r i  
1 
1 
1 
High 
4 
4 
1 
4 
Higher still 
4 
1 
2 
1 
Higher still 
3 
4 
2 
4 
High 
3 
18.28. Experiments at 300°C in a packed bed reactor with very large recycle 
stream give the results shown below for the first order catalytic decomposi- 
tion A -+ R -, S. Under the best possible conditions (always at 300°C) 
what CR,,axICAO 
may we expect, and how do you suggest we get this (what 
flow pattern and particle size, large or small)? 
4 
1 
0.5 
No recycle 
8 
2 
0.5 
18.29. Experiments with a basket type mixed flow reactor on the solid catalyzed 
decomposition A -+ R -+ S give the results of Table P18.29. Under the 
best possible reaction conditions (always at 300°C) what is the maximum 
concentration of R we may expect? How do you suggest that this be ob- 
tained? 


=== PDF PAGE 440 ===
424 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
Table P18.29 
Size of 
Porous Pellets 
Temperature 
WIFAO 
CR,,X/~AO 
6 mm 
300°C 
25 
23 % 
12 mm 
300°C 
50 
23 % 
18.30. Reactant A at CAo = 10 mol/m3 is to be passed through a packed bed 
catalytic reactor where it will decompose into either R or S. To maximize 
the formation of R and for 90% decomposition of A determine 
whether to operate in the strong pore diffusion regime or in the diffu- 
sion-free regime 
whether to use plug flow or mixed flow (high recycle) 
CR expected in the exit stream. 
The kinetics of the decomposition, when free of pore diffusion resistance, 
is given by 
18.31. A packed bed reactor converts A to R by a first-order catalytic reaction, 
A +R. With 9-mm pellets the reactor operates in the strong pore diffusion 
resistance regime and gives 63.2% conversion. If these pellets were re- 
placed by 18-mm pellets (to reduce pressure drop) how would this affect 
the conversion? 
18.32. We want to build a packed bed reactor filled with 1.2-cm porous catalyst 
particles (p, = 2000 kg/m3, .CBc = 2 x 
m3/m cat. s) to treat 1 m3/s of 
feed gas (113 A, 113 B, 113 inert) at 336OC and 1 atm to 80% conversion of 
A. Experiments with fine catalyst particles which are free from diffusional 
resistance show that 
How much catalyst must we use? 
18.33. In an experimental mixed flow reactor with 10 gm of 1.2-mm catalyst 
particles and a feed of 4 cm3/s of pure A at 1 atm and 336°C we get 80% 
conversion for the first-order reaction 
We want to design a commercial-sized reactor to treat large amounts of 
feed to 80% conversion at the above temperature and pressure. Our choice 


=== PDF PAGE 441 ===
Problems 425 
is between a fluidized bed of 1-mm particles (assume mixed flow of gas) 
and a packed bed of 1.5-cm particles. Which should we choose so as to 
minimize the amount of catalyst needed? How much advantage is there 
in this choice? 
Additional Data: For the catalyst particles: 
p, = 2000 kg/m3 
gk = 
m3/m cat. s 
In aqueous solution, and in contact with the right catalyst, reactant A is 
converted to product R by the elementary reaction A -+ 2R. Find the 
mass of catalyst needed in a packed bed reactor for 90% conversion of 
lo4 mol A/hr of feed having C, 
= lo3 mol/m3. For this reaction 
18.34. k"' = 8 x 
m3/m3 bed. s 
18.35. k"' = 2 m3/m3 bed. s 
Additional data: 
Diameter of porous catalyst pellets = 6 mm 
Effective diffusion coefficient of A in the pellet = 4 X 
m3/m cat. s 
Voidage of packed bed = 0.5 
Bulk density of packed bed = 2000 kg/m3 of bed 
18.36. A first-order catalytic reaction A(1) -+ R(1) is run in a long, narrow vertical 
reactor with upflow of liquid through a fluidized bed of catalyst particles. 
Conversion is 95% at the start of operations when the catalyst particles 
are 5 mm in diameter. The catalyst is friable and slowly wears away, 
particles shrink and the fine powder produced washes out of the reactor. 
After a few months each of the 5-mm spheres has shrunk to 3-mm spheres. 
What should be the conversion at this time? Assume plug flow of liquid. 
(a) Particles are porous and allow easy access for reactants (no resistance 
to pore diffusion). 
(b) Particles are porous and at all sizes provide a strong resistance to 
pore diffusion. 
18.37. At present we are running our catalytic first-order reaction in the strong 
pore diffusion regime in a packed bed reactor filled with platinum impreg- 
nated 6-mm particles of uniform size. A catalyst manufacturer suggests 
that we replace our catalyst with 6-mm pellets consisting of fused 0.06- 
mm grains. The voidage between grains in the pellet would be about 25%. 
If these new pellets were free of pore diffusion resistance in their large 
voids (between grains), but if the grains were still in the strong diffusional 
resistance regime, how would this change affect the weight of catalyst 
needed and the reactor volume? 
18.38. Instead of impregnating the whole porous particle uniformly with platinum 
(see Problem 18.37), suppose we only impregnate the outer layer of the 


=== PDF PAGE 442 ===
426 
Chapter 18 Solid Catalyzed Reactions 
spherical particle to a thickness of 0.3 mm. How much platinum do we 
save by this change? Assume that we are in the strong pore diffusion 
regime throughout. 
18.39. Because the catalytic reaction A -+R is highly exothermic with rate highly 
temperature-dependent, a long tubular flow reactor immersed in a trough 
of water, as shown in Fig. P18.39, is used to obtain essentially isothermal 
kinetic data. Pure A at O°C and 1 atrn flows through this tube at 10 cm3/ 
sec, and the stream composition is analyzed at various locations. 
Determine what size of plug flow reactor operating at O°C and 1 atrn would 
give 50% conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 100 kmollhr of pure A. 
Distance from feed 
input, meters 
Partialpressureof 
A, mm Hg 
\ \ \ 
Nonporous catalyst 2 gm, 
1 cm3 bulk, fraction voids = 0.5 
0 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
84 
(00) 
760 600 475 390 320 275 240 215 
150 
Figure P18.39 
18.40. A closed-loop experimental G/S batch system as sketched in Fig. P18.19 
is used to study the kinetics of a catalytic reaction A -+ 2R. Pure A is 
introduced into the systems and is circulated at O°C and 1 atrn at 10 cm3/sec. 
The stream is analyzed from time to time with the following results: 
(a) Determine the size of a plug flow reactor operating at O°C and 1 atrn 
required to effect a 50% conversion of A to R for a feed rate of 100 
kmol Alhr. 
(b) Repeat part a with the modification that an inert at a partial pressure 
of 1 atrn is present in the closed loop so that the total pressure at the 
start is 2 atm. 
Time, min 
Partialpressure 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
(00) 
760 
600 
475 
290 
320 
275 
240 
215 
150 
of A, mm Hg 


=== PDF PAGE 443 ===
Chapter 19 
The Packed Bed Catalytic 
Reactor 
Reactant gas can be made to contact solid catalyst in many ways, and each has 
its specific advantages and disadvantages. Figure 19.1 illustrates a number of 
these contacting patterns. These may be divided into two broad types, the fixed- 
bed reactors of Fig. 1 9 . 1 ~ ~  
b, and c and the fluidized-bed reactors of Figs. 19.ld, 
e, and f. The moving-bed reactor of Fig. 19.lg is an intermediate case which 
embodies some of the advantages and some of the disadvantages of fixed-bed 
and fluidized-bed reactors. Let us compare the merits of these reactor types. 
1. In passing through fixed beds, gases approximate plug flow. It is quite 
different with bubbling fluidized beds where the flow is complex and not 
well known, but certainly far from plug flow, and with considerable by- 
passing. This behavior is unsatisfactory from the standpoint of effective 
contacting and requires much more catalyst for high gas conversion, and 
greatly depresses the amount of intermediate which can be formed in series 
reactions. Hence, if efficient contacting in a reactor is of primary importance, 
then the fixed bed is favored. 
2. Effective temperature control of large fixed beds can be difficult because 
such systems are characterized by a low heat conductivity. Thus in highly 
exothermic reactions hot spots or moving hot fronts are likely to develop 
which may ruin the catalyst. In contrast with this, the rapid mixing of solids 
in fluidized beds allows easily and reliably controlled, practically isothermal, 
operations. So if operations are to be restricted within a narrow temperature 
range, either because of the explosive nature of the reaction or because of 
product distribution considerations, then the fluidized bed is favored. 
3. Fixed beds cannot use very small sizes of catalyst because of plugging and 
high-pressure drop, whereas fluidized beds are well able to use small-size 
particles. Thus for very fast reactions in which pore and film diffusion may 
influence the rate, the fluidized bed with its vigorous gas-solid contacting 
and small particles will allow a much more effective use of the catalyst. 
4. If the catalyst has to be treated (regenerated) frequently because it deacti- 
vates rapidly, then the liquid-like fluidized state allows it to be pumped easily 
from unit to unit. This feature of fluidized contacting offers overwhelming 
advantages over fixed bed operations for such solids. 
427 


=== PDF PAGE 444 ===
428 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Coolant- 
in 
in 
t 
Gas in 
t 
Reactant 
gas in 
(a) 
(b) 
Packed bed, first stage, 
small amount of catalyst 
Gas in 
(c) 
Reactant 
gas in 
t 
(d) 
Regenerator (shown 
as a flu~d~zed 
bed) 
Regenerated 
catalyst returned to 
the flu~d~zed 
bed 
Regenerator 
gas 
(e) 
Figure 19.1 Various types of catalytic reactors. 


=== PDF PAGE 445 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 429 
Catalyst to 
regenerator 
~eactant fl ' 
gas in 
(f) 
Figure 19.1 (Continued.) 
Catalyst 
i. 
Fluidized 
in 
bed 
M o\ 
of 
Gas out 
~i ng bed - 
solids 
Sidestream to 
regenerator 
Bucket elevator or 
hydraulic lift to raise 
catalyst to top of reactor 
@ 
Reactant f 
u 
gas in - 
With these points in mind, let us proceed to Fig. 19.1. Figure 1 9 . 1 ~  
is a typical 
packed bed reactor embodying all its advantages and disadvantages. Figure 19.lb 
shows how the problem of hot spots can be substantially reduced by increasing 
the cooling surface. Figure 1 9 . 1 ~  
shows how intercooling can still further control 
the temperature. Note that in the first stage where reaction is fastest, conversion 
is kept low by having less catalyst present than in the other stages. Units such 
as these can all be incorporated in a single shell or can be kept separate with 
heat exchanges between stages. 
Figure 19.ld shows a fluidized reactor for a stable catalyst which need not be 
regenerated. The heat exchanger tubes are immersed in the bed to remove or 
add heat and to control the temperature. Figure 19.le shows operations with a 
deactivating catalyst which must be continually removed and regenerated. Figure 
19.lf shows a three-stage countercurrent unit which is designed to overcome the 
shortcomings of fluidized beds with regard to poor contacting. Figure 19.lg shows 
a moving-bed reactor. Such units share with fixed beds the advantages of plug 
flow and disadvantages of large particle size, but they also share with fluidized 
beds the advantages of low catalyst-handling costs. 
Many factors must be weighed to obtain optimum design, and it may be that 
the best design is one that uses two different reactor types in series. For example, 
for high conversion of a very exothermic reaction we may well look into the use 
of a fluidized bed followed by a fixed bed. 
The main difficulties of design of catalytic reactors reduce to the following 
two questions: (1) How do we account for the nonisothermal behavior of packed 
beds? and (2) How do we account for the nonideal flow of gas in fluidized beds. 
Consider a packed bed with heat exchange (Figs. 1 9 . 1 ~  
and 19.lb). For an 
exothermic reaction Fig. 19.2 shows the types of heat and mass movement that 
will occur when the packed bed is cooled at the walls. The centerline will be 
hotter than the walls, reaction will be faster, and reactants will be more rapidly 
consumed there; hence, radial gradients of all sorts will be set up. 


=== PDF PAGE 446 ===
430 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Walls cooled 
to 100" 
Reactant 
Product 
I 
flows inward 
flows outward 
Depletion of reactant 
at centerline 
Heat flows 
outward 
Figure 19.2 The temperature field in a packed bed reactor for an exother- 
mic reaction creates radial movement of heat and matter. 
The detailed analysis of this situation should include the simultaneous radial 
dispersion of heat and matter, and maybe axial dispersion too. In setting up 
the mathematical model, what simplifications are reasonable, would the results 
properly model the real situation, would the solution indicate unstable behavior 
and hot spots? These questions have been considered by scores of researchers, 
numerous precise solutions have been claimed; however, from the point of view 
of prediction and design the situation today still is not as we would wish. The 
treatment of this problem is quite difficult, and we will not consider it here. A 
good review of the state-of-the-art is given by Froment (1970), and Froment and 
Bischoff (1990). 
The staged adiabatic packed bed reactor of Fig. 19.1~ 
presents a different 
situation. Since there is no heat transfer in the zone of reaction the temperature 
and conversion are related simply, hence the methods of Chapter 9 can be applied 
directly. We will examine numerous variations of staging and heat transfer to 
show that this is a versatile setup which can closely approximate the optimum. 
The fluidized bed and other suspended solid reactor types are considered in 
the next chapter. 
Staged Adiabatic Packed Bed Reactors 
With proper interchange of heat and proper gas flow, staged adiabatic packed 
beds become a versatile system, which is able to approximate practically any 
desired temperature progression. Calculation and design of such a system is 
simple, and we can expect that real operations will closely follow these predic- 
tions. 
We illustrate the design procedure with the single reaction A + R with any 
kinetics. This procedure can be extended to other reaction types without diffi- 
culty. We first consider different ways of operating these reactors, and then 
compare these and point out when one or other is favored. 
Staged Packed Beds (Plug Flow) with Intercooling.' 
The reasoning in Chapter 
9 shows that we would like the reacting conditions to follow the optimal tempera- 
' This section follows directly from pp. 215-235 of Chapter 9. Hence it is suggested that the reader 
familiarize himself with that section before proceeding here. 


=== PDF PAGE 447 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 431 
I Exothermic reversible I 
I Exothermic irreversible I 
I 
Optimum 4 
T,,, 
I Endothermic / 
Optimum 
Figure 19.3 Sketch showing how staged packed beds can closely approach the optimal tempera- 
ture progression. 
ture progression. With many stages available this can be closely approximated, 
as shown in Fig. 19.3. 
For any preset number of stages the optimization of operations reduces to 
minimizing the total amount of catalyst needed to achieve a given conversion. 
Let us illustrate the procedure for two-stage operations with reversible exothermic 
reactions. The method of attack is shown in Fig. 19.4. In this figure we wish to 
minimize the total area under the 11-6 versus X ,  curve in going from X ,  = 0 
to X ,  = some fked or required conversion. In searching for this optimum we 
have three variables which we can set at will: the incoming temperature (point 
T,), the amount of catalyst used in the first stage (locates point b along the 
adiabatic), and the amount of intercooling (locates point c along the bc line). 
Fortunately, we are able to reduce this 3-dimensional search (5-dimensional for 
Area measures 
Figure 19.4 Optimum two-stage packed bed reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 448 ===
432 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
three stages, etc.) to a one-dimensional search where Ta alone is guessed. The 
procedure is as follows: 
1. Guess Ta. 
2. Move along the adiabatic line until the following condition is satisfied: 
This gives point b in Fig. 19.4, thus the amount of catalyst needed in the 
first stage as well as the outlet temperature from that stage. Especially in 
preliminary design it may not be convenient to use the criterion of Eq. 1. A 
simple alternative is a trial-and-error search. Usually two or three carefully 
chosen trials keeping away from low rate conditions will yield a good 
design, close to the optimum. 
3. Cool to point c which has the same rate of reaction as point b; thus 
(-ra)leaving a reactor = ( -ra)entering the next reactor 
4. Move along the adiabatic from point c until the criterion of Eq. 1 is 
satisfied, giving point d. 
5a. If point d is at the desired final conversion then we have guessed T, cor- 
rectly. 
5b. If point d is not at the desired final conversion try a different incoming 
temperature T,. Usually three trials will very closely approach the op- 
timum. 
For three or more stages the procedure is a direct extension of that presented 
here, and it still remains a one-dimensional search. This procedure was first 
developed by Konoki (1956a) and later, independently, by Horn (1961a). 
Overall cost considerations will determine the number of stages to be used, 
so in practice we examine 1, then 2, etc., stages until a minimum cost is obtained. 
Let us next consider the two other cases of Fig. 19.3. For irreversible exothermic 
reactions the criterion for optimal operations has also been presented by Konoki 
(1956b). For endothermic reactions the optimal criterion has yet to be developed. 
In all these cases a trial-and-error search keeping far from the regions of low 
rates is recommended. 
Staged Mixed Flow Reactors. For very high recycle the staged recycle reactors 
approach mixed flow. As shown in Fig. 19.5, in this case the reactors should 
operate on the line of optimum temperature progression, the best distribution 
of catalyst among the stages being found by the maximization of rectangles (see 
Figs. 6.9-6.11). In effect we need to choose the distribution of catalyst so as to 
maximize area KLMN which then minimizes the shaded area in Fig. 19.5. 
Staged Packed Beds with Recycle. Here we have a flexible system which can 
approach mixed flow and as such is able to avoid regions of low rates. Figure 


=== PDF PAGE 449 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 433 
Figure 19.5 Optimum two-stage mixed flow reactor set up (infinite recycle 
for staged packed beds). 
19.6 illustrates two-stage operations with a recycle ratio R = 1, and a feed 
temperature Tf. Extension to three or more stages follows directly. 
Konoki (1961) presents the criterion for optimal operations; however, in pre- 
liminary design a few good guesses will suffice to closely approach optimal opera- 
tions. 
In recycle operations the heat exchangers can be located in a number of places 
without affecting what goes on in the reactor. Figure 19.6 illustrates one of these; 
other alternatives are shown in Fig. 19.7. The best location will depend on 
Figure 19.6 Optimum two-stage packed bed reactor with recycle. The 
conversions shown represent a recycle ratio R = 1 in both stages. 


=== PDF PAGE 450 ===
434 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
\I 
* T 
Tf 
Figure 19.7 Different location for the heat exchangers while keeping 
the same reactor conditions as in Fig. 19.6. 
convenience for startup, and on which location gives a higher heat transfer 
coefficient (note that the exchanger arrangement of Fig. 19.7a has a higher 
through-flow of fluid than the arrangement of Fig. 19.7b). 
Cold Shot Cooling. One way of eliminating the interstage heat exchangers is 
by properly adding cold feed directly into the second and succeeding stages of 
the reactor. The procedure is shown in Fig. 19.8. The criterion for optimal 
operations of such an arrangement is given by Konoki (1960), and, in somewhat 
different form, by Horn (1961b). They found that the extent of interstage cooling 
is given by Eq. 2, and this is shown in Fig. 19.8. 
With cold shot cooling the calculation of reactor volumes by the 11-ri versus 
X, curve beco~lles more complicated because different amounts of feed are 
involved in each stage. We can also cold shot cool with inert fluid. This will 
affect both the 11-ri versus XA and T versus XA curves. 
Choice of Contacting System. With so many contacting alternatives let us sug- 
gest when one or other is favored. 
1. For endothermic reactions the rate always decreases with conversion; hence 
we should always use plug flow with no recycle (see Chapter 9). For exother- 


=== PDF PAGE 451 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 435 
Qin 
Figure 19.8 Cold shot cooling eliminates interstage heat exchangers. 
mic reactions the slope of the adiabatic line determines which contacting 
scheme is best. The rest of these comments concern this case of exother- 
mic reactions. 
2. All else being equal, cold shot cooling has the advantage of lower cost 
because interstage heat exchangers are not needed. However, cold shot 
cooling is only practical when the feed temperature is very much below the 
reaction temperature, and, in addition, when the temperature does not 
change much during reaction. These conditions can be summarized as fol- 
lows: 
Cold shot cooling is practical when 
Two situations, one when cold shot cooling is practical, the other when it 
is not, are shown in Fig. 19.9. 
Figure 19.9 Situations where cold shot cooling could be helpful and where it should not 
be used. 


=== PDF PAGE 452 ===
436 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
3. For exothermic reactions if the slope of the adiabatic line is low (large 
temperature rise during reaction) it is advantageous to avoid the low temper- 
ature regime where the rate is very low. Thus use high recycle approaching 
mixed flow. On the other hand, if the slope is high (small temperature rise 
during reaction) the rate decreases with conversion and plug flow is to be 
used. Typically, for pure gaseous reactant the slope of the adiabatic is small; 
for a dilute gas or for a liquid it is large. As an example, consider a reactant 
having C, = 40 Jlmol K and AH, = - 120 000 Jlmol and inerts with C, = 
40 Jlmol . K: 
For a pure reactant gas stream 
For a dilute 1% reactant gas stream 
For a 1-molar liquid solution 
The adiabatic lines for these cases are sketched in Fig. 19.10 and illustrate 
this point. 
Use plug flow 
Plug vs. mixed flow 
1
5
0
0
 
K 
Extremely low 
rates here 
Figure 19.10 Sketch showing why plug flow is used for steep adiabatic 
lines, and mixed flow (packed beds with large recycle) for lines with 
small slope. 


=== PDF PAGE 453 ===


=== PDF PAGE 454 ===
438 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
4. For exothermic reactions in staged reactors the above discussion can be 
summarized as follows: 
use plug flow. 
For a dilute gas (or a solution) requiring large preheating to bring 
Preliminaries for a Set of Problems Dealing with a Single Packed Bed Reactor 
A single catalytic packed bed reactor is to be designed to treat 100 molls of 
reactant A and produce product R. Feed gas enters at 2.49 MPa and 300 K, the 
maximum allowable temperature is 900 K unless otherwise noted, the product 
stream is wanted at 300 K, and the thermodynamics and kinetics of the exothermic 
reaction are given to us in Fig. 19.11. Prepare a sketch showing the details of 
the system you plan to use: 
type of reactor: plug, recycle, or mixed (m recycle) 
amount of catalyst needed 
heat duty ahead of the reactor, at the reactor itself, and after the reactor 
the temperature of all flowing streams 
Example 19.1 treats one case, Problems 19.13 to 19.16 treat four other cases. 
In all these problems assume that 
we are dealing with ideal gases. 
Cp = 40 Jlmol . K for all materials, and at all temperatures. This means (from 
Example 9.1) that AH, has the same value at all temperatures. 
DESIGN OF A SINGLE ADIABATIC PACKED BED SYSTEM 
Work out a good design for 80% conversion of a feed consisting of 1 mol A and 
7 mol inert. 
First determine the slope of the adiabatic line. For this note that 8 moles enter1 
mole of A. Thus 
Cp = (40 Jlmol - K) (8) = 320 JI(mo1 of A + inerts) . K 
Thus the slope of the adiabatic is 


=== PDF PAGE 455 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 439 
Drawing various adiabatics in Fig. 19.11 it seems that the one shown on Fig. 
E19.la looks best. So now tabulate XA versus ll(-ra) from Fig. 19.11. This gives 
Plotting ll(-ra) versus XA gives Fig. E19.lb. This tells right away that a recycle 
reactor should be used. Thus 
w - x~ - 0.8(6 X 8) = 38.4 kg. slmol 
F~~ -;a 
The recycle ratio, from Fig. E19.lb is R = 1. 
Figure E19.la,b 
The feed is available at 300 K, but enters the reactor at 600 K (from Fig. 
E19.la), so it must be heated. Thus 


=== PDF PAGE 456 ===
440 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
The product stream leaves the reactor at 800 K and must be cooled to 300 K, thus 
We show our recommended design in Fig. E19.1~. 
Figure E19.1~ 
Preliminaries for a Set of Problems Dealing with Two Packed Bed Reactors in 
Series 
Two catalyst filled packed bed reactors are to be designed to process 100 
molls of reactant A so as to produce product R. Feed gas enters at 2.49 MPa 
and 300 K, the allowable T,,, 
= 900 K, unless otherwise noted, T,, 
= 300 K, 
the product stream is wanted at 300 K, and the thermodynamics and kinetics of 
the exothermic reaction are given to us in Fig. 19.11. Prepare a sketch of your 
recommended design and on it show 
the flow arrangement selected: plug, recycle (give R value), or mixed (when- 
ever R > 5). Do not consider injection of cold fluid between stages unless 
the problem states that you are permitted to do so. 
weight of catalyst needed in each stage. 
location and duty of heat exchangers. 
temperature of the flowing streams. 
DESIGN OF A TWO ADIABATIC PACKED BED SYSTEM 
Work out a good design for 85% conversion of a pure A feed to two packed beds. 
I 
First determine the slope of the adiabatic line and draw it lightly on Fig. 18.11. 


=== PDF PAGE 457 ===
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 441 
(a) 
Figure E19.2a 
A 
Optimum 
1.0 
/ 
Equilibrium 
0.66 ---------------< 
--------- 
XA 
+ 
+ 4 ~ +  
4++*- 
Adiab$iL + 
+ ++-+ 
1 
This gives a very shallow adiabatic, as sketched in Fig. E19.2~. The rate continu- 
ally increases as you move along this adiabatic, thus use a mixed flow reactor 
operating at the optimum. 
To minimize the amount of catalyst needed Chapter 6 says use the method 
of maximization of rectangles, so tabulate XA versus ll(-r;),,, 
+4ce- 
And use the method of maximization of rectangles as shown in Fig. E19.2b. 
Then from the performance equation 
+ 
Slope = - 
2000 
W - 
= (XA) ------ - shaded area 
Fo 
(-r:)op, 
- (in Fig. E19.26 
we have 
W, = FA, (area), = 100 (2.376) = 237.6 kg 
and 
W2 = FA, (area), = 100 (3.819) = 381.9 kg 


=== PDF PAGE 458 ===
442 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Locus of 
optima 
-J-+ 
1 .o 
XA 
(6) 
Figure E19.2b 
Now to heat exchange: 
For the first reactor. If we want to cool the feed before introducing it into the 
first reactor we'd have to cool it to 
which is well below absolute zero. This is impossible. So we have to cool it 
somewhere inside the recycle reactor loop as shown in Fig. E19.2~. But wherever 
you put the exchanger the amount of heating or cooling needed is the same. 
So to go to 66% conversion at 820°C the amount of heat needed per mole of 
A is 
(820 - 300)40 + 0.66(-80000) = -32 000 Jlmol 
heat in 
heat out 
But for 100 molls of feed 
Q, = (32 000 J/mo1)(100 molls) = -3.2 MW (cooling) 
For the second reactor. To go from X, = 0.66 at 820 K to X, = 0.85 at 750 
K requires, per mole 
(750-820) 40 + (0.85 - 0.66) (-80 000) = -18 000 Jlmol 
So for 100 molls 
I 
Q2 = (- 18 000)(100) = - 1.8 MW (cooling) 


=== PDF PAGE 459 ===
Problems 443 
Similarly for the exchanger needed to cool the exit stream from 750 K to 300 K 
Q3 = 100(40)(300 - 750) = -1.8 MW 
So our recommended design is shown in Fig. E19.2~. 
Figure E19.2~ Note: exchanger Q, can be placed at A, B, or C and exchanger Q, can be placed 
at D, E, or F. 
REFERENCES 
Froment, G. F., First Symp. on C.R.E., Washington, D.C., June 1970, Advances in Chemis- 
try Series No. 109, A.C.S., 1972. 
- 
and Bischoff, K. B., Chemical Reactor Analysis and Design, 2nd ed., John Wiley and 
Sons, 1990. 
Horn, F., 2. Electrochemie, 65,295 (1961a). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 14,20 (1961b). 
Konoki, K. K., Chem. Eng. (Japan), 21,408 (1956a). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 21,780 (1956b). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 24,569 (1960). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. (Japan), 25, 31 (1961). 
PROBLEMS 
19.1-19.8. Sketch the flow sheet for the two reactor system represented by the 
X, versus T diagrams Figs. P.19.1 to Fig. P19.8, and on the sketch show 
the flow rate of all streams for each 100 mol of entering fluid, and where 
pertinent give the recycle ratios. 
the location of the heat exchangers and indicate whether they cool 
or heat. 


=== PDF PAGE 460 ===
444 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
Figures P19.1 to P19.8 


=== PDF PAGE 461 ===
Problems 445 
19.9-19.12. Sketch the XA versus T diagram for the two packed bed reactor 
system shown in Figs. P19.9 to P19.12 for an exothermic reaction where 
conversion: XAl = 0.6, XA2 = 0.9. 
recycle ratio: R, = 2, R, = 1. 
heat exchangers all cool the reacting fluid. 
12. 
Figures P19.9 to p19.12 
For the single reactor situation outlined in the text and followed by Exam- 
ple 19.1 let us here consider four alternatives. We plan to use 
19.13. . . . pure A feed, XA = 0.85, in a reactor which follows the optimal 
temperature progression. 
19.14. . . . a 50% A-50% inert feed, X, = 0.70, in an adiabatic reactor of 
your choice. 
19.15. . . . a 20% A-80% inert feed to an adiabatic reactor of your choice whose 
outlet is at XA = 0.75 and T = 825 K. 
19.16. . . . a 5% A-95% inert feed, XA = 0.5, in an adiabatic reactor of your 
choice. 


=== PDF PAGE 462 ===
446 
Chapter 19 The Packed Bed Catalytic Reactor 
For the two-reactor situation outlined in the text and followed by Example 19.2 
let us consider five alternatives, thus 
19.17. . . . a pure A feed, XA = 0.85. 
19.18. . . . a pure A feed, XA = 0.85 and T,,, 
= 550 K. In this problem, do not 
worry about the possibility of an unstable operating point. But before 
you build such a unit, you'd better check for this-otherwise 
you'll be 
in trouble. 
19.19. . . . a 20% A-80% inert feed, XA = 0.85 
19.20. . . . a 40% A-60% inert feed, XA = 0.95 
19.21. . . . a 5% A-95% inert feed, XA = 0.95 (try cold feed injection) 


=== PDF PAGE 463 ===
Chapter 20 
Reactors with Suspended Solid 
Catalyst, Fluidized Reactors of 
Various Types 
The formation of phthalic anhydride is highly exothermic, and even with the 
most careful design the heat removal from packed bed reactors can become 
uncheckable, leading to temperature runaways, meltdowns, and even explosions. 
If the chief engineer of those reactors had been required to sit on the reactor 
during start up, there would be fewer chief engineers ab0ut.l 
The invention of the fluidized bed with its suspended and rapidly mixing solids 
completely overcame this dangerous situation. This is because the rapid mixing 
of solids, and the large heat sink (the solids) will only allow the bed temperature 
to change very slowly, and it can be easily controlled. 
Another problem-catalyst 
formulators (those magicians) have been very 
successful in creating better and better catalysts, those that give higher and higher 
rates of reaction. But to use the whole of the catalyst volume effectively we must 
keep the Thiele modulus 
This means using smaller and smaller particles as k '  is made larger and larger. 
This leads us to use suspended solids. Also note that with these very effective 
catalysts the required residence time of reactant gas becomes very small, say a 
few seconds for a large 30-m high reactor. 
Figure 20.1 shows the transition from fixed to BFB to TF to FF to PC reactors. 
20.1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ABOUT SUSPENDED 
SOLIDS REACTORS 
This is a vast subject, but we must be brief and can only touch on the highlights. 
See Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) for a much more complete presentation. 
"They ought to give medals for making phthalic," Chem. Week, 70, 40 (1952). 


=== PDF PAGE 464 ===
448 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Fixed bed 
Bubbling 
fluidized 
Very 
little solids - 
throughflow 
Streaks ' 
and 
channels 
Turbulent 
Fast 
Pneumatic 
fluidized 
fluidized 
conveying 
m 
DEl 
m 
-Solids r 
solids 
Lean core 
dense wall 
- Solids 
Solids 
No throughflow of solids 
Throughflow of solids, leading 
to circulating fluidized beds 
Figure 20.1 G/S contacting regimes, from low to very high gas velocity. 
First, Geldart (1973) and Geldart and Abrahamson (1978) looked at how 
different kinds of solids behaved when fluidized, and came up with the following 
simple classification of solids which we now call the Geldart classification, thus 
Geldart A, B, C, D. These are shown and described in Fig. 20.2. 
Next consider the distribution of solids in the vertical vessel. Let f be the 
volume fraction of solids at height z of the vessel. Then as shown in Fig. 20.3 
when we go to higher and higher gas velocities the solids spread throughout 
the vessel. 
t 
I 
I
!
 
1
1
 1
1
1
1
 
Bed expands, then 
I 
forms bubbles. 
These split and *\ 
d 
Bubbles grow large. 
Bed internals help 
keep bubble size 
\ 
-A*.,- 
Difficult to 
fluidize. solids- 
Cohesive 
'+ o+, 
clump, and rise 
as slugs. Gas 
O.l 
channels 
10 
50 
100 
500 
1000 
Very large exploding 
bubbles. Low bed void- 
age. Liable to spout 
Figure 20.2 Geldart classification of solids in BFB. 


=== PDF PAGE 465 ===
20.1 Background Information about Suspended Solids Reactors 449 
I I \ 
Pneumatic convevinn (PC) 
11 
\ \ 
Fast fluidization (FF) 
low solid throughflow rate 
high solid throughflow rate 
C 
9 
a, 
\ 
Turbulent fluidization (TF) 
r: 
Bubbling bed (BFB) 
i 
o,2-0,4 
0.4-0.6 
I 
I 
I 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
m3 solids 
(Volume fraction of solids)./ (=) 
-t 
Figure 20.3 Distribution of solids in the various con- 
tacting regimes. 
GIS Contacting Regimes. To develop the language that tells what contacting 
regime we have at hand consider solids of size d, in a bed of cross-sectional area 
A which is fed gas at a superficial gas velocity u,, as shown in Fig. 20.4. 
To simplify the equations let us start by defining two dimensionless quantities 
(1) 
Re, = u*d,* 
(2) 
Minimum Fluidizing Velocity. The solids will be suspended when the pressure 
drop exceeds the weight of solids. This happens when the gas velocity exceeds 
the minimum fluidizing velocity umf. This velocity is given by Ergun (1952), and 
in dimensionless form is 
Terminal Velocity, u,. Individual particles are blown out of the bed when the 
gas velocity exceeds what is called the terminal velocity, u,. Haider and Levens- 


=== PDF PAGE 466 ===
450 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
f [-I -volume fract~on of sol~ds In the bed 
€[-I -volume fract~on of vo~ds ~n the bed 
dJml -partrcle size 
ps[kglm31 -part~cle dens~ty 
I 
uo = superficial gas velocity 
(velocity if vessel is empty of solids) 
[m3 gas/m2 bed . 
sl 
Figure 20.4 Notation for a bed of suspended solids. 
pie1 (1989) give this velocity for spherical particles as 
and for irregularly shaped particles of sphericity 4, 
where the particle sphericity 4, is defined as 
4s= ( 
surface of a sphere 
surface of a particle volume 
For fine particles we evaluate the size by screen analysis, which gives d,,,. 
Unfortunately, there is no general relationship between dscr and d,. The best we 
can say for pressure drop considerations is 
dp = 4, d,, 
for irregular particles with no seeming longer or shorter di- 
mension 
* d, = ds, 
for irregular particles with one somewhat longer dimension 
but with length ratio not greater than 2 : 1 (eggs, for example) 
@ d 
4 d 
for irregular particles with one shorter dimension but with 
length ratio not less than 1 : 2 (pillows, for example) 
Although a single particle will be entrained by a stream of gas flowing faster 
than u,, this finding does not extend to a fluidized bed of particles. In the BFB 
the gas velocity can be many times greater than u, with very little carryover of 
solids. Thus the single particle terminal velocity is not very useful in estimating 
when entrainment of solids will become appreciable. 


=== PDF PAGE 467 ===
20.2 
The Bubbling Fluidized Bed-BFB 
451 
dp* 
dp" 
Figure 20.5 General flow regime diagram for the whole range of G/S contacting. 
General Chart Showing GIs Contacting Regimes. Grace (1986) prepared a 
graph to show the expected behavior of GIs systems all the way from BFB to 
CFB. Figure 20.5 shows a somewhat modified version of this chart. In it you will 
see Eqs. 3, 4, and 5, which tell when the bed will fluidize and when solids will 
begin to entrain from the vessel. 
We now look at the various contacting regimes in detail and see what predic- 
tions are available for each regarding reactor behavior. 
20.2 THE BUBBLING FLUIDIZED BED-BFB 
Pass gas upward through a bed of fine particles. For superficial (or inlet) gas 
velocities u, much in excess of this minimum the bed takes on the appearance 
of a boiling liquid with large bubbles rising rapidly through the bed. In this state 
we have the bubbling fluidized bed, BFB. Industrial reactors particularly for 
solid catalyzed gas-phase reactions often operate as bubbling beds with gas 
velocities u, = 5 - 30 u,. 
Calculations show that the conversion in bubbling beds may vary from plug 
flow to well below mixed flow, see Fig. 20.6, and for many years the perplexing 
and embarrassing thing about this was that often we could not reliably estimate 


=== PDF PAGE 468 ===
452 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Results from 8 different studies 
1 .  
I 
Plug flow 
I I 
I 
0.01; 
I 
20 
I 
I 
I 
I 
40 
60 
k"9T"' = k'7' 
Figure 20.6 Conversion of reactant in BFB is usually poorer than for both 
plug flow and mixed flow. Adapted from Kunii and Levenspiel (1991). 
or guess what it would be for any new situation. Because of this, scale-up was 
cautious and uncertain, and preferably left to others. 
It was soon recognized that this difficulty stemmed from lack of knowledge 
of the contacting and flow pattern in the bed: in effect, the bypassing of much 
of the solids by the rising bubble gas. This led to the realization that adequate 
prediction of bed behavior had to await a reasonable flow model for the bed. 
Since the bubbling bed represents such severe deviations from ideal contacting, 
not just minor ones as with other single-fluid reactors (packed beds, tubes, etc.), 
it would be instructive to see how this problem of flow characterization has been 
attacked. A wide variety of approaches have been tried. We consider these in turn. 
Dispersion and Tanks in Series Model. The first attempts at modeling naturally 
tried the simple one-parameter models; however, observed conversion well below 
mixed flow cannot be accounted for by these models so this approach has been 
dropped by most workers. 
RTD Models. The next class of models relied on the RTD to calculate conver- 
sions. But since the rate of catalytic reaction of an element of gas depends on 
the amount of solid in its vicinity, the effective rate constant is low for bubble 
gas, high for emulsion gas. Thus any model that simply tries to calculate conver- 


=== PDF PAGE 469 ===
20.2 
The Bubbling Fluidized Bed-BFB 
453 
sion from the RTD and the fixed rate constant in effect assumes that all elements 
of gas, both slow and fast moving, spend the same fraction of time in each of 
the phases. As we will show when we treat the details of gas contacting in 
fluidized beds this assumption is a shaky one, hence the direct use of the RTD 
to predict conversions, as developed for linear systems in Chapter 11, is quite inad- 
equate. 
Contact Time Distribution Models. To overcome this difficulty and still use 
the information given by the RTD, models were proposed which assumed that 
faster gas stayed mainly in the bubble phase, the slower in the emulsion. Gilliland 
and Knudsen (1971) used this approach and proposed that the effective rate 
constant depends on the length of stay of the element of gas in the bed, thus 
short stay means small k 
or k = k,tm 
long stay means large k 
where m is a fitted parameter. Thus combining with Eq. 11-13 we find for 
the conversion 
The problem with this approach involves obtaining a meaningful E function 
to use in Eq. 7 from a measured C-curve. This approach has also been discarded. 
Two-Region Models. Recognizing that the bubbling bed consists of two rather 
distinct zones, the bubble phase and the emulsion phase, experimenters spent 
much effort in developing models based on this fact. Since such models contain 
six parameters, see Fig. 20.7, many simplifications and special cases have been 
explored (eight by 1962,15 by 1972, and over two dozen to date), and even the 
complete six-parameter model of Fig. 20.7 has been used. The users of this model, 
.. 
. .  
. . 
. . 
.. 
... 
.. . 
Bubble 
Emulsion 
Fraction of 
solids here, ml 
Plu€! 
to 
Plup: to 
rn ixed 
mixed 
- \ I -  
Figure 20.7 Two-phase model to represent the bubbling fluidized bed, with 
its six adjustable parameters, v,, V,, (DIuL),, (DIuL),, m,, K. 


=== PDF PAGE 470 ===
454 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
those dealing with FCC reactors, claim that this model fits their data beautifully. 
However, they had to choose different sets of parameter values for each crude 
oil feed, in each of their FCC reactors. Also some of the values for their parame- 
ters made no physical sense, for example, a negative value for V, or v,. 
With this as the situation we should also discard this type of model which 
gives a perfect fit but predicts nothing, and brings no understanding with it. The 
reason is that we have no idea how to assign values to the parameters for new 
conditions. Thus this is just a curve-fitting model, and we should be able to 
do better. 
Hydrodynamic Flow Models. The discouraging result with the previous ap- 
proaches lead us reluctantly to the conclusion that we must know more about 
what goes on in the bed if we hope to develop a reasonable predictive flow 
model. In particular we must learn more about the behavior of rising gas bubbles, 
since they probably cause much of the difficulty. 
Two developments are of particular importance in this regard. The first is 
Davidson's remarkable theoretical development and experimental verification 
[see Davidson and Harrison (1963) for details] of the flow in the vicinity of a 
single rising bubble in a fluidized bed which is otherwise at minimum fluidizing 
conditions. What he found was that the rise velocity of the bubble u,, depends 
only on the bubble size, and that the gas behavior in the vicinity of the bubble 
depends only on the relative velocity of rising bubble and of gas rising in the 
emulsion u,. In the extremes he found completely different behavior, as shown 
in Fig. 20.8. For catalytic reactions we are only interested in fine particle beds, 
so let us ignore the large particle extreme from now on. 
Now, for the fine particle bed gas circulates within the bubble plus a thin cloud 
surrounding the bubble. Thus the bubble gas forms a vortex ring and stays 
segregated from the rest of the gas in the bed. Theory says that 
In fine particle beds 
Ub + U, 
Fast bubble 
Clouded bubble 
thickness of cloud 
diameter of bubble 
In large particle beds 
Ub < ue 
Slow bubble 
Cloudless bubble 
Figure 20.8 Extremes of gas flow in the vicinity of rising gas bubbles in BFBs. 


=== PDF PAGE 471 ===
20.3 
The K-L Model for BFB 455 
As an example if the bubble rises 25 times as fast as the emulsion gas (not all 
that uncommon because this ratio is 100 or more in some industrial operations), 
then the cloud thickness is just 2% of the bubble diameter. This is the regime 
which interests us. 
The second finding on single bubbles is that every rising gas'bubble drags 
behind it a wake of solids. We designate this wake by a, where 
volume of wake 
a varies between 0.2 and 2.0 
volume of bubble 
depending on the research study 
(9) 
See Rowe and Partridge (1962,1965) for the original study which discovered this. 
20.3 
THE K-L MODEL FOR BFB 
Hydrodynamic type flow models can be developed to represent the BFB, based 
on the above two seemingly simple findings. Let us consider and develop the 
simplest of these, the K-L BFB model. 
Pass an excess of gas upward through a bed of fine particles. With a large 
enough bed diameter we get a freely bubbling bed of fast bubbles. As simplifica- 
tions, assume the following: 
The bubbles are all spherical, all of the same size d,, and all follow the 
Davidson model. Thus the bed contains bubbles surrounded by thin clouds 
rising through an emulsion. We ignore the upflow of gas through the cloud 
because the cloud volume is small compared to that of the bubble. This is 
the regime where u, 
u, (see Fig. 20.8). 
The emulsion stays at minimum fluidization conditions, thus the relative 
G/S velocity stays constant in the emulsion. 
* Each bubble drags up a wake of solids behind it. This generates a circulation 
of solids in the bed, upflow behind the bubbles, and downflow everywhere 
else in the bed. If this downflow of solids is rapid enough then gas upflow 
in the emulsion is impeded, can actually stop, and even reverse itself. Such 
downflow of gas has been observed and recorded, and occurs when 
We ignore any upflow or downflow of gas in the emulsion. We show this model 
in Fig. 20.9. 
Let 
u, = superficial gas velocity in the bed, m3 gas/m2 bed - s 
d = diameter, m 
E = fraction of voids in the bed 
subscripts b, c, e, w refer to bubble, cloud, emulsion, and wake, respectively. 
subscripts m, 
mf, 
and f refer to packed bed, minimum fluidization, and bubbling 
fluidized bed conditions, respectively. 


=== PDF PAGE 472 ===
456 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
For gas u,, 
either up or- 
down 
US' - 
down 
Emulsion 
Cloud 
Bubble 
Wake 
uo 
Cloud and wake 
Figure 20.9 Model and symbols used to describe the K-L bubbling gas fluid- 
ized bed. 
In essence, given umf, emf, uo, a, and the effective bubble size in the bed d,, this 
model tells you all the other properties of the bed-flows, 
region volumes, 
interchange rates, and consequently reactor behavior. 
Material Balance for Gas and for Solids 
From Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) a material balance for the bed material gives 
ubr = 0 . 7 1 1 ( ~ d ~ ) ~ ' ~  
m/s ... rise velocity of a single bubble in a 
(10) 
bed otherwise at umf 
acceleration of gravity = 9.8mls2 
u, = u, - umf + ub1) mls 
rise velocity of bubbles in a bubbling bed (11) 
m3 bubbles 
S = bed fraction in bubbles, m3 bed 


=== PDF PAGE 473 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 457 
Useful relationships: 
Hm(l - Em) = Hmf (1 - Emf) = Hf (1 - Ef) 
1 - E  
I -a=-= 
%...H=height 
1 - Emf 
Hf 
a8 ub 
us = 
m/s . . . downflow of emulsion solids 
i - ~ - ~ a '  
ue = %f - us, mls . . . rise velocity of emulsion gas (can be + or -) 
Emf 
Using Davidson's theoretical expression for bubble-cloud circulation and the 
Higbie theory for cloud-emulsion diffusion the interchange of gas between bubble 
and cloud is then found to be 
(interchange volume between 
b and c, or c and b)ls 
Kbc = 4.50 
+ 5.85 - 
- 
(2 ) 
) 
- 
volume of bubble 
, s-I 
and between cloud-wake and emulsion 
'I2 - interchange volumels -, 
volume of bubble , S 
volume of solids 
in bubble 
fb = 0.001 - 0.01 = 
. . . rough estimate from experiment 
volume of bed 
3umf /emf 
volume of solids in cloud and wake 
fc = 
- Emf) [ 
+,I = 
Ubr - 
IEmf 
volume of bed 
(16) 
- 
volume of solids in the rest of the emulsion 
fe = (1 - ~ m ~ ) ( l  
- 8) - 
fc - fb = 
volume of bed 


=== PDF PAGE 474 ===
458 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Application to Catalytic Reactions 
In our development we make two questionable assumptions: 
* We ignore the flow of gas through the cloud since the cloud volume is very 
small for fast bubbles. 
We ignore the flow of gas, either up or down, through the emulsion since 
this flow is much smaller than the flow through the bubbles. 
In effect, we consider the emulsion gas as stagnant. Of course more general 
expressions can be developed for beds where bubbles have thick clouds (not too 
large and fast bubbles), or where flow through the emulsion is significant (u, 
close to umf, thus where u, = 1-2 umf). However, for fast bubble, vigorously 
bubbling fine particle beds the above assumptions are reasonable. 
We next see how to calculate performance in such a bed. 
First-Order Reaction. Let the reaction be 
mol 
A+,, 
r A U r = k C A ,  - 
f 
m3s.s 
Then for any slice of bed we have 
reactant rising 1-transfer 
I 
reactant 
/-transfer 
I 
reactant 
in bubble 
6 Kbc, srl- 
in cloud 
6 Kc,, srl- 
in emulsion 
I 
reaction: fb k"', s-l 
bubble 
I 
reaction: f, k ,  s-l 
cloud 
I 
reaction: fe k ,  s-I 
emulsion 
Accounting for these five resistances in series-parallel, 
eliminating cloud and 
emulsion concentrations, and integrating from the bottom to the top of the 


=== PDF PAGE 475 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 459 
bed gives 
We also find that the average gas composition seen by the solids is approximately 
(from S. Kimura, personal communication) 
of solids alone, WIp, 
This quantity is important for noncatalytic G/S reactions because it is this CA 
that the solids see and react with. 
Let us now look at packed bed reactors. Assuming plug flow Kbc + w, 
Kc, + a, so Eq. 21 reduces to 
in 
- 
&lfrf'' = k H p ( l  - E P ) = ktT' = - 
u 0 
k' 
(23) 
for plug flow 
CAP 
%A, 
- 
C
~
O
 - C ~ p  
C ~ p  
= 
J ~ " ~ I I I  
(24) 
Comparing Eq. 21 with 23, and Eq. 22 with 24 shows that a fluidized bed can 
be treated as a plug flow reactor if 
K is replaced by k'" 
Comments. The five terms in brackets of the performance equation, Eq. 21, 
represent the complex series-parallel resistances to mass transfer and reaction or 
Reactant A 
transfer 
+ 
in 
transfer 
- 
in 
in bubble 
to cloud 
cloud 
to emulsion 
emulsion 
reaction 
in bubble 
reaction 
in cloud 
reaction 
in emulsion 


=== PDF PAGE 476 ===
460 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
+- Large bubble 
+- Medium size bubble 
-- 
Small bubble 
0.06 - 
0.04 
I 
I 
I\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
2 
4 
6 
8 
f 
H 
k"' 
BFB 
, dimensionless time 
uo 
Figure 20.10 Performance of a fluidized bed as a function of bubble size, as deter- 
mined by Eq. 21. Compare with the plug flow and mixed flow predictions. 
For very fast reaction (large k '  value) very little A gets as far as the emulsion 
and the first two terms dominate. For slow reaction the latter terms become 
increasingly important. 
Since the bubble size is the one quantity which governs all the rate quantities 
with the exception of k ,  we can plot the performance of a fluidized bed as a 
function of d,, as shown in Fig. 20.10. Note that large d, gives poor performance 
because of extensive bypassing of bubble gas, and that the performance of the 
bed can drop considerably below mixed flow. 
For multiple reactions the effect of this flow is much more serious still. Thus 
for reactions in series the lowering in amount of intermediate formed can be 
and usually is quite drastic. 
Finally we have kept this presentation very brief. To help understand how to 
use it please look at the following illustrative example. 
:' First-Order Catalytic Reaction in a BFB 
Reactant gas (u, = 0.3 m/s, v, = 0.3 .rr m3/s passes upward through a 2-m diameter 
fluidized bed (umf = 0.03 m/s, emf = 0.5) containing 7 tons of catalyst (W = 7000 
kg, p, = 2000 kg/m3). Reaction proceeds as follows: 
m3 
A + R, 
-rz = kU'C, . . . with k"' = 0.8 - 
m 3 s . s  


=== PDF PAGE 477 ===
20.3 The K-L Model for BFB 461 
(a) Calculate the conversion of reactant. 
(b) Find the proper mean concentration of A seen by the solids. 
(c) If gas were made to flow downward through the solids we would have a 
packed bed. Assuming plug flow of gas find the conversion of reactant for 
this situation. 
I Additional Data 
C, 
= 100 mol/m3, CZj = 20 X 
m2/s, a = 0.33 
Estimated bubble size in the bed: d, = 0.32 m 
See Fig. E20.1 which represents this system. 
I u,, = 0.3 rn/s 
CAO = 100 rnol/m3 
Figure E20.1 
1 SOLUTION 
Preliminary Determine the rise velocity of bubbles 
Now see whether the fast bubble model of this chapter applies. 
Check for slugging: The bubble size (32 cm) is small compared to the bed 
size (200 cm), hence no slugging. 
Check the fast bubble assumption: Take the velocity ratio 
Since the bubble rises -25 times as fast as the emulsion gas we have a fast 
bubble with thin cloud-less 
than 1 cm thick. 


=== PDF PAGE 478 ===
462 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Thus we can safely use the bubbling bed model of this chapter. 
(a) Calculate XA. Replacing numbers into the expressions for this model 
gives, in turn, 
fb = 0.001 - 0.01, choose it to be 0.001 
1 
Therefore 
CA = 0.68 . . .or Xn = 32% (see Fig. 20.10) 
'A0 
(b) Find cA 
seen by the solids. Since every particle samples all the gas in the 
bed, 7'" = (C,, - CA)l-r*, or 
(c) Calculate XA for a fixed bed. From Eq. 11.44 or 11.51, for plug flow, 


=== PDF PAGE 479 ===
20.3 
The K-L Model for BFB 463 
Therefore 
This point is shown in Fig. 20.10. 
Comments 
The conversion in the fluidized bed is drastically lower than in the packed 
bed (32% vs. 95%), and is even much below mixed flow (75%). This comes 
from the severe bypassing of reactant gas in the large gas bubbles. Reduce 
the size of bubbles in the bed and the conversion will rise spectacularly. 
Gas enters at CAo = 100, leaves at CA = 68; however, the solids see a much 
lower concentration of A, or CA = 11. Thus the solids, mostly in the emulsion, 
are starved for gaseous reactant. This sort of finding, quite general for fast 
bubble beds, is of great importance in GIS reactions. Thus in combustion 
and roasting of fine solids these solids may be starved for 0, even though 
the off gas from the bed may contain a significant amount of oxygen. 
Example 20.1 and the solutions to Problems 20.1 and 20.2 at the end of this 
chapter tell how conversion is affected by bubble size according to the 
K-L model. This is shown in Fig. 20.11. In all four cases the rate constant 
is the same and the catalyst is fixed at 7 tons, so k"' 7'" = f,,,,, HBFB
k l u ,  = 2.97. 
Multiple Reactions and Product Distribution in Fluidized Beds 
A derivation similar to that for single first-order reactions can be developed for 
the Denbigh reaction system 
t 
. . . . . . . . . .  
:: 
. . . . . . . . . . . .  
..................... 
. . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . .  '.: :... 1.:) 
.:.: . Plug :.....: 
.;i:;: 
. . . . . . . . . .  
..:.: 
.........:....... ::;' : 
. . . . . . .  
.
.
.
.
.
 
;:i, 
. 
:':. .::. :.,: 
: ' .: 
_ _ _ - _ .  
t 
Figure 20.11 Different bubble size gives different reactor perfor- 
mance. Data from Example 20.1 and Problems 20.3 and 20.4. 


=== PDF PAGE 480 ===
464 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
and its special cases 
These derivations are rather tedious, we will not give them here, but we refer 
the reader to Levenspiel (1996) Chapter 25 for them. However, to illustrate the 
general findings let us take one example: 
k;' 
k;l' 
k;" = 0.8 m3/(m solid)3 . s 
A-R-S 
kj" = 0.025 m3/(m solid)3 . s 
Let us suppose that these reactions take place in a BFB reactor having a gas 
flow rate similar to that of Example 20.1. 
Let us see how much catalyst is needed to achieve C,, ,,, for different sizes 
of bubbles in the BFB. The results are shown in Fig. 20.12. 
I+;i; 
= 9.5 tons 
= 15 tons 
= 16 cm 
I 
. . . .  
. 
. 
. . . . . . .  
N = 32 tons 
.&. 
. :?,,:. t ), 
db = 32 crn 
Figure 20.12 Different bubble sizes give different bed sizes for 
maximum production of intermediate. 


=== PDF PAGE 481 ===
20.4 
The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 
465 
The results of the calculations verify the general findings on bubbling fluid- 
ized beds. 
* The BFB always needs more catalyst than a fixed bed to achieve a given 
conversion of reactant, or to reach C,, 
,,,. 
For reactions in series the BFB always gives a lower yield of intermediate 
compared to a fixed bed. 
For reactions in parallel of the same reaction order the product distribution 
is the same in fixed and BFBs. 
Final Remarks About BFB 
The expressions developed in this chapter show that if we know emf, estimate a, 
and measure umf and u,, then all flow quantities and regional volumes can be 
determined in terms of one parameter, the bubble size. Figure 20.9 then repre- 
sents the model as visualized. The use of this model to calculate chemical reactor 
behavior is straightforward and direct. The special feature of this model is that 
its one parameter can be tested against what is measured and what is observed. 
Various other hydrodynamic models have been proposed recently, using other 
combinations of assumptions such as 
Changing bubble size with height in the bed 
Negligible bubble-cloud resistance 
Negligible cloud-emulsion resistance 
Nonspherical bubbles 
In all cases the underlying rationale for these hydrodynamic models rests on the 
observation that beds with identical solids and gas flow rates may develop either 
large bubbles or small bubbles depending on bed diameter, distributor design, 
baffle arrangement, etc.; thus, bubble size must enter as the primary parameter 
in the model. A consequence of this argument is that models which do not 
allow for different bubble sizes at given imposed bed conditions certainly cannot 
be adequate. 
The power of this class of model should be apparent. For example, even the 
simplest of these models, the one considered here, gives unexpected predictions 
(e.g., that most of the gas in the bed may be flowing downward) which are 
subsequently verified. More important still, this type of model can be tested, it 
can be shown to be wrong, and it can be rejected, because its one parameter, 
the bubble size, can be compared with observation. 
20.4 THE CIRCULATING FLUIDIZED BED-CFB 
At gas velocities higher than those used for BFBs we successively enter the 
turbulent (TB), fast fluidized (FF), and the pneumatic conveying (PC) regimes. 
In these contacting regimes solids are entrained out of the bed and must be 
replaced. Thus in continuous operations we have the CFB, shown in Fig. 20.1. 
Flow models are very sketchy for these flow regimes. Let us see what is known. 


=== PDF PAGE 482 ===
466 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
Lean - 
.
.
.
.
 
. . . . .  
. ., . 
. 
. 
:. 
. 
.
.
.
 
. . . . .  
- Gas and 
solids 
Solids 
I 
Gas 
0.01-0.02 
0.2-0.4 
Figure 20.13 The TB and its solid distribution. 
The Turbulent Bed (TB) 
At higher gas velocities the BFB transforms into a TB-no 
distinct bubbles, 
much churning, and violent solid movement. The surface of the dense bed fades 
and solids are found increasingly in the lean region above the dense bed. 
The concentration of solids in the upper lean region can be reasonable repre- 
sented by an exponential decay function which starts from the value in the lower 
region f, and falls to fik the limiting value in an infinitely high vessel. This is the 
value for pneumatic conveying. 
The flow of gas in the dense region is somewhere between the BFB and plug 
flow. The TB is shown in Fig. 20.13. 
Unfortunately no reasonable flow model has been developed for the dense 
region of a TB. Research is needed here. 
In beds of both coarse and fine solids one may observe a somewhat different 
solid distribution with height-a 
distinct difference between dense and lean 
regions and a sharp dense phase surface, as shown in Fig. 20.14. This behavior 
is more typical of fluidized combustors, not catalytic reaction systems. 
Gas and 
solids 
Solids 
t 
Gas 
A 
dense bed 
Figure 20.14 Behavior of a TB of large and small particles. 


=== PDF PAGE 483 ===
20.4 
The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 467 
Lean 
- 
Dense 
solids 
f--+ 
Gas and 
At a cross 
section 
Solids 
t 
Gas 
Figure 20.15 Behavior of a FF 
Solid 
fraction 
Model 
I 
I 
Wall 
Upflow gas 
velocity 
Observed K; 
* 
0 
R 
Downf low 
f 
Wall 
\ 
/ 
At the cross section 
bed. 
The Fast Fluidized Bed (FF) 
At even higher gas velocity (see Fig. 20.5) the bed enters the FF regime. One 
characteristic of this transition is that the entrainment of solids rises dramatically 
at this point. Bi et al. (1995) found this transition to occur at 
In the FF regime the solid movement in the lower region of the vessel becomes 
less chaotic and seems to settle to a lean core surrounded by a denser annulus 
or wall zone. 
The upper region retains its exponential decay behavior. 
Figure 20.15 shows the distribution of solids in the whole FF bed and at a 
cross section. The model which represents the FF bed is shown in Fig. 20.16. 
Height 
solids 
mas 
and 
fluid flow) 
Solids 
Gas 
Figure 20.16 Model for a FF reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 484 ===
468 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
The quantities that need to be known to predict the behavior of the FF reactor 
are "a," Kc,, fX, and f,. Measurements show that 
uoa = 2 - 4 s-I 
for Geldart A solids 
= 5 s-l 
for Geldart AB solids 
= 7 s-l 
for Geldart B solids 
Measured values for fX and fd have been summarized by Kunii and Levenspiel 
(1995). Values for Kc, have yet to be measured. The best we can do today is 
estimate their order of magnitude from K,, and Kc, of the BFB. So at this time 
we cannot predict reactor behavior. However, to see how to make the material 
balance and conversion calculation see the numerical example given in Kunii 
and Levenspiel (1997). 
Pneumatic Conveying (PC) 
Finally at the highest gas velocities we exceed what is called the choking velocity. 
Above this the bed is in pneumatic transport. This transition velocity depends 
on the solid flow rate, and according to Bi and Fan (1991) occurs at 
In the PC regime particles are well distributed in the reactor, with no wall or 
downflow zone, but with a slight decrease in solid fraction with height. So we 
can assume plug flow of solids and of gas up the vessel. 
The Downflow CFB 
Fluidized catalytic cracking reactors, called "cat crackers" or FCC reactors, are 
one of society's most important large-scale reactors. On an average, each such 
solids 
RGas 
and 
. . 
. . 
Denser 
Solids 
A 
f = f* + (fd- f*kaz 
1 
Note: very little + 
solids in the vessel 
10.06 
f 
I 
0.01-0.02 
Gas 
Figure 20.17 Model for a PC reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 485 ===
20.4 The Circulating Fluidized Bed-CFB 469 
unit processes about 6000 m3/day (40 000 barrelslday) of crude oil to produce 
gasoline, diesel fuel, and jet aircraft fuel to power the engines of today. There 
are about 420 FCC reactors in the world today, running day and night to satisfy 
the needs of our insatiable societies. 
These reactors take long chain hydrocarbons and crack them to produce a 
whole host of shorter chain hydrocarbons. To illustrate 
we want 
octane 
The original cat cracker was invented in the early 1940s and was one of 
chemical engineering's most important contributions to World War 11. However, 
those early units did not use very selective catalysts and, with their large deviations 
from plug flow, gave very little of whatever intermediate was desired. 
In the 1960s better (more selective) and more active catalysts were created, 
and the needed reaction time for the oil vapor was consequently reduced to 
seconds, so the upflow FF reactors were invented. Approaching closer to plug 
flow gave the designer better control of product distribution, and allowed produc- 
tion of a larger fraction of desired product: for example, octane for automo- 
bile fuel. 
With this development, most of the BFBs in the world were cut up for scrap 
to be replaced by upflow FF reactors. 
Today, approaching year 2000, engineers want to do better still. Why? Because 
increasing the production of desired product by 1% would increase the profit 
per reactor by $1 millon to $2 millionlyear. As Fig. 20.16 shows, the upflow FF 
reactor has a practically stagnant or a downsliding wall zone of catalyst and gas, 
and this results in deviation from plug flow. 
How to avoid this? The obvious answer is to use a downflow FF reactor. These 
can operate at very high gas velocities, and remain close to plug flow. 
Today much exciting research is going on in this area, and we may some day, 
not too far in the future, see many of the upflow short contact time FCC units 
be replaced by downflow units. The payoff for this would be enormous. 
Remarks About CFB 
Here we have sketched the three regimes of CFB and their general behavior; 
however, we have not presented their performance equations. The reason is that 
the parameters for their reasonable models are uncertain today; hence, the 
predictions based on these models will likewise be uncertain. Still the general 
material balances and the form of the performance equations are available, see 
Kunii and Levenspiel (1991, 1997). 


=== PDF PAGE 486 ===
470 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
20.5 THE JET IMPACT REACTOR 
The idea here is to force two streams, one of reactant, the other of a very hot 
heat carrier or catalyst, to collide at very high velocity and thereby mix intensely 
and react at high temperature. 
For an all-gas product, the product stream is rapidly quenched, while for a 
gas-solid product, a cyclone separates the two phases, after which the gas is rapidly 
cooled. By using the word "rapidly" we mean that the whole operation-mixing, 
reacting, separating and quenching-is 
done in 0.1 to 0.3 seconds. 
This type of reactor aims to challenge fast fluidization with its 1 to 10 second 
gas residence time as the prime reactor for the catalytic cracking of petroleum. 
The claim is that the higher cracking temperature and shorter residence time 
will give a very different-and 
better-distribution 
of reaction products. 
Another application is to ultrapyrolyze cellulose and other biomass wastes. 
Commercial tests show that one can transform about 75% of wood into oil, and 
about 70% of sawdust into oil-useful liquids having the consistency of light engine 
oil. Much research is proceeding on this application (from Bergougnou, 1998). 
REFERENCES 
Bergougnou, M. A. private communication, 1998. 
Bi, H. T., and Fan, L. S., Paper 101e, A.1.Ch.E. Annual Meeting, Los Angeles, 1991. 
Bi, H. T., Grace, J. R., and Zhu, J. X., Trans. I. Chem. E., 73,154 (1995). 
Davidson, J. F., and Harrison, D., Fluidized Particles, Cambridge Univ. Press, New 
York, 1963. 
Ergun, S., Chem. Eng. Prog., 48, 89 (1952). 
Geldart, D., Powder Technol., 7, 285 (1973). 
-, 
and Abrahamson, A. A., Powder Technol., 19,133 (1978). 
Gilliland, E. R., and Knudsen, C. W., Chem. Eng. Prog. Symp. Ser. 67 (116), 168 (1971). 
Grace, J. R., Can. J. Chem. Eng., 64, 353 (1986). 
Haider, A., and Levenspiel, O., Powder Technol., 58, 63 (1989). 
Kimura, S., private communication. 
Kunii, D., and Levenspiel, O., Fluidization Engineering, 2nd ed., Butterworth-Heinemann, 
Boston, MA, 1991. 
-, 
in Fluidization VIZI, Tours, p. 17 (1995). 
-, 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 52, 2471 (1997). 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Rowe, P. N., and Partridge, B. A., Proc. Symp. on Interaction between Fluids and Particles, 
p. 135, I. Chem. E. (1962); Trans. I. Chem. E., 43,157 (1965). 
PROBLEMS 
A suggestion for raising the conversion in Example 20.1 is to use more 
solids. So for the same bed diameter (2 m) and same mean bubble size 
(0.32 m) find XA and the mean concentration of gas seen by the solids CA 
if we use 
20.1. . . . 14 tons of catalyst 
20.2. . . . 21 tons of catalyst 


=== PDF PAGE 487 ===
Problems 471 
In Example 20.1 the conversion is very low and unsatisfactory. One sugges- 
tion for improvement is to insert baffles into the bed and thereby cut down 
the effective bubble size. Find X, if 
20.3. . . . d, = 16 cm 
20.4. . . . d, = 8 cm 
In Example 20.1 another suggestion for improving performance is to use a 
shallower bed, keeping W unchanged, thereby decreasing the superficial 
gas velocity. Find X, if we double the bed cross-sectional area (thus make 
u, = 15 c d s )  and 
20.5. . . . keep db unchanged at d, = 32 cm 
20.6. . . . make d, = 8 cm by suitable baffles 
20.7. In Example 20.1 still another suggestion is to use a narrower and taller 
bed, keeping W unchanged. Following this suggestion find X, if we halve 
the bed cross-sectional area (thus make u, = 60 cmls) and keep d, = 32 cm. 
20.8. Example 20.1 showed that a 7-ton bed with 32-cm bubbles gave 32% conver- 
sion. Suppose we diluted the catalyst 1 : 1 with inert solids ending up with 
a 16ton bed. How would this affect the conversion of reactant? Would it 
be higher or lower than 32%? 
20.9. Mathis and Watson in AIChE J., 2, 518 (1956) reported on the catalytic 
conversion of cumene in both fluidized and packed beds of catalyst 
catalyst 
C9Hl2 + 0 2 ~ C 6 H 5 0 H  
+ (CH,),O + C 
cumene 
phenol 
acetone 
In very dilute cumene-air mixtures the kinetics are essentially first-order 
reversible with respect to cumene with an equilibrium conversion of 94%. 
In packed bed experiments (H, = 76.2 mm) using downflow of gas 
(u, = 64 m d s )  the conversion of cumene was found to be 60%. However, 
with upflow of gas at the same flow rate in the same bed, the solids fluidize 
(u,, = 6.1 mmls) and bubbles of gas were observed roughly 13.5 mm in 
diameter. What conversion do you expect to find under these conditions? 
Estimated values: 


=== PDF PAGE 488 ===
472 
Chapter 20 Fluidized Reactors of Various Types 
20.10. Calculate the conversion in a fluidized bed reactor for the catalytic hydro- 
genation of nitrobenzene to analine. 
catalyst 
C6H5N02(g) + 
C6H~NH2(g) + H2°(g) 
(A) 
(R) 
Data: 
H, = 1.4 m 
p, = 2.2 g/cm3 
d, = 10 cm 
d, = 3.55 m 
!Zeff = 0.9 cm2/s 
a = 0.33 
T = 270°C 
umf = 2 cm/s 
E, = 0.4071 
u, = 30 cm/s 
= 0.60 
We plan to use an excess of hydrogen in which case we can ignore expan- 
sion, and can assume simple first-order kinetics: 
A + R 
-rx = k"' C, with kN' = 1.2 cm3/cm3 cat . s 
20.11. In a laboratory packed bed reactor (H, = 10 cm and u, = 2 cmls) 
conversion is 97% for the first-order reaction A + R. 
(a) Determine the rate constant k"' for this reaction. 
(b) What would be the conversion in a larger fluidized bed pilot plant 
(H, = 100 cm and u, = 20 cmls) in which the estimated bubble size 
is 8 cm? 
(c) What would be the conversion in a packed bed under the conditions 
of part (b)? 
Data: From experiment, 
umf = 3.2 cmls, 
emf = E, 
= 0.5 
From the literature, 
!Z = Be = 3 X 
cm2/s, 
a = 0.34 


=== PDF PAGE 489 ===
Chapter 21 
Deactivating Catalysts 
The previous chapters assumed that the effectiveness of catalysts in promoting 
reactions remains unchanged with time. Often this is not so, in which case the 
activity usually decreases as the catalyst is used. Sometimes this drop is very 
rapid, in the order of seconds; sometimes it is so slow that regeneration or 
replacement is needed only after months of use. In any case, with deactivating 
catalysts regeneration or replacement is necessary from time to time. 
If deactivation is rapid and caused by a deposition and a physical blocking of 
the surface this process is often termed fouling. Removal of this solid is termed 
regeneration. Carbon deposition during catalytic cracking is a common example 
of fouling 
If the catalyst surface is slowly modified by chemisorption on the active sites 
by materials which are not easily removed, then the process is frequently called 
poisoning. Restoration of activity, where possible, is called reactivation. If the 
adsorption is reversible then a change in operating conditions may be sufficient to 
reactivate the catalyst. If the adsorption is not reversible, then we have permanent 
poisoning. This may require a chemical retreatment of the surface or a complete 
replacement of the spent catalyst. 
Deactivation may also be uniform for all sites, or it may be selective, in which 
case the more active sites, those which supply most of the catalyst activity, are 
preferentially attacked and deactivated. 
We will use the term deactivation for all types of catalyst decay, both fast and 
slow; and we will call any material which deposits on the surface to lower its 
activity a poison. 
This chapter is a brief introduction to operations with deactivating catalysts. 
We will consider in turn: 
The mechanisms of catalyst decay 
The form of rate equation for catalyst decay 
How to develop a suitable rate equation from experiment 
* How to discover the mechanism from experiment 
Some consequences for design 


=== PDF PAGE 490 ===
474 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Although this is basically a rather involved subject, still its very importance from 
the practical standpoint requires at least an introductory treatment. 
21.1 MECHANISMS OF CATALYST DEACTIVATION 
The observed deactivation of a porous catalyst pellet depends on a number of 
factors: the actual decay reactions, the presence or absence of pore diffusion 
slowdown, the way poisons act on the surface, etc. We consider these in turn. 
Decay Reactions. Broadly speaking, decay can occur in four ways. First, the 
reactant may produce a side product which deposits on and deactivates the 
surface. This is called parallel deactivation. Second, the reaction product may 
decompose or react further to produce a material which then deposits on and 
deactivates the surface. This is called series deactivation. Third, an impurity 
in the feed may deposit on and deactivate the surface. This is called side-by- 
side deactivation. 
If we call P the material which deposits on and deactivates the surface, we 
can represent these reactions as follows: 
Parallel deactivation: 
Series deactivation: 
Side-by-side deactivation: 
The key difference in these three forms of decay reactions is that the deposition 
depends, respectively, on the concentration of reactant, product, and some other 
substance in the feed. Since the distribution of these substances will vary with 
position in the pellet, the location of deactivation will depend on which decay 
reaction is occurring. 
A fourth process for catalyst decay involves the structural modification or 
sintering of the catalyst surface caused by exposure of the catalyst to extreme 
conditions. This type of decay is dependent on the time that the catalyst spends 
in the high temperature environment, and since it is unaffected by the materials 
in the gas stream we call it independent deactivation. 
Pore Diffusion. For a pellet, pore diffusion may strongly influence the progress 
of catalyst decay. First consider parallel deactivation. From Chapter 18 we know 
that reactant may either be evenly distributed throughout the pellet (M, < 0.4 


=== PDF PAGE 491 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 475 
and 6 = 1) or may be found close to the exterior surface (M, > 4 and 8 < 1). 
Thus the poison will be deposited in a like manner-uniformly 
for no pore 
resistance, and at the exterior for strong pore resistance. In the extreme of very 
strong diffusional resistance a thin shell at the outside of the pellet becomes 
poisoned. This shell thickens with time and the deactivation front moves inward. 
We call this the shell model for poisoning. 
On the other hand, consider series deactivation. In the regime of strong pore 
resistance the concentration of product R is higher within the pellet than at 
the exterior. Since R is the source of the poison, the latter deposits in higher 
concentration within the pellet interior. Hence we can have poisoning from the 
inside-out for series deactivation. 
Finally, consider side-by-side deactivation. Whatever the concentration of re- 
actants and products may be, the rate at which the poison from the feed reacts 
with the surface determines where it deposits. For a small poison rate constant 
the poison penetrates the pellet uniformly and deactivates all elements of the 
catalyst surface in the same way. For a large rate constant poisoning occurs at 
the pellet exterior, as soon as the poison reaches the surface. 
The above discussion shows that the progress of deactivation may occur in 
different ways depending on the type of decay reaction occurring and on the 
value of the pore diffusion factor. For parallel and series poisoning, the Thiele 
modulus for the main reaction is the pertinent pore diffusion parameter. For side- 
by-side reactions, the Thiele modulus for the deactivation is the prime parameter. 
Nonisothermal effects within pellets may also cause variations in deactivation 
with location, especially when deactivation is caused by surface modifications 
due to high temperatures. 
Additional Factors Influencing Decay. Numerous other factors may influence 
the observed change in activity of catalyst. These include pore mouth blocking 
by deposited solid, equilibrium, or reversible poisoning where some activity 
always remains, and the action of regeneration (this often leaves catalyst with 
an active exterior but inactive core). 
Most important of all, the observed deactivation may result from a number 
of processes at work simultaneously; for example, the speedy immobilization of 
the most active sites by poison PI, and then the slower attack of the remainder 
of the sites by P,. 
Although the possible influence of all these factors should be examined in the 
real case, in this introductory treatment we will concentrate on the first two 
factors: the decay reaction and pore diffusion. There are enough lessons here to 
illustrate how to approach the more complete problem. 
21.2 THE RATE AND PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS 
The activity of a catalyst pellet at any time is defined as 
rate at which the pellet converts reactant A - - T i  
a =  
-- 
rate of reaction of A with a fresh pellet 


=== PDF PAGE 492 ===
476 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
and in terms of the fluid bathing the pellet the rate of reaction of A should be 
of the following form: 
main stream 
main stream 
temperature 
concentration 
present activity of 
(5) 
the catalyst pellet 
Similarly, the rate at which the catalyst pellet deactivates may be written as 
( d e a ~ t i o n )  = , 
( main stream 
main stream 
temperature 
concentration 
present state of 
(6) 
the catalyst pellet 
In terms of nth-order kinetics, Arrhenius temperature dependency, and iso- 
thermal conditions, Eq. 5 becomes, for the main reaction: 
and for deactivation which in general is dependent on the concentration of gas- 
phase species, Eq. 6 becomes 
where d is called the order of deactivation, m measures the concentration depen- 
dency and Ed is the activation energy or temperature dependency of the deacti- 
vation. 
For different decay reactions we may expect different forms for the above 
equations. Thus 
- r i  = ktCia 
For parallel deactivation 
(A+R;A+PJ) 
-- 
da - 
- k Cmad 
dt 
d
A
 
= k t  C i a  
For series deactivation 
(A+R+PJ) 
-- 
da - 
- k c m a d  
dt 
d
R
 


=== PDF PAGE 493 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 477 
-7; = kr Cia 
For side-by-side deactivation 
(A+R;P-Pi) 
-- 
da - 
- k p a d  
dt 
d
P
 
-r; = k1C%a 
For independent deactivation 
(concentration independent) 
-4 = kdad 
dt 
In certain reactions, such as isomerizations and cracking, deactivation may be 
caused both by reactant and product, or 
A-R 
da 
A d P J  
and 
--- 
dt - kd(CA + CR)mad 
R + P i  
Since CA + C, remains constant for a specific feed this type of deactivation 
reduces to the simple-to-treat independent deactivation of Eq. 12. 
Although the above nth-order expressions are quite simple they are general 
enough to embrace many of the decay equations used to date [see Szepe and 
Levenspiel (1968)l. 
The Rate Equation from Experiment 
Experimental devices for studying deactivating catalysts fall into two classes: 
those which use a batch of solids, and those which use a through flow of solids. 
Figure 21.1 shows some of these devices. 
Batch solids-for slow deactivation 
Plug flow 
8 -+QCL 
for fluid 
Batch for both 
M~xed flow 
Recycle flow 
solid and fluid 
for fluid 
for fluid 
Flow of solids-for fast deactivation 
Solids: - plug flow 
Fluid: - plug flow 
Raining 
solids 
Solids: mixed flow 
Fluid: questionable 
flow pattern 
Figure 21.1 Slow deactivation may use a batch of solids in experimentation; fast 
deactivation requires a flow of solids. 


=== PDF PAGE 494 ===
478 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Because of the ease of experimentation batch-solids devices are much pre- 
ferred; however, they can only be used when deactivation is slow enough (in the 
order of minutes or longer) so that sufficient data on the changing fluid composi- 
tion can be obtained before exhaustion of the catalyst. When deactivation is 
very rapid (in the order of seconds or less) then a flowing-solids system must be 
used. Cracking catalysts whose activity half-lives can be as short as 0.1 second 
fall into this class. 
The method of searching for a rate equation is analogous to that of homoge- 
neous reactions: start with the simplest kinetic form and see if it fits the data. If 
it doesn't, try another kinetic form and so on. The main complication here is 
that we have an extra factor, the activity, to contend with. Nevertheless, the 
strategy is the same; always start by trying to fit the simplest rate expression. 
In the following sections we treat the batch-solids devices in some detail, and 
then briefly consider the flowing-solids system. 
Now the type of batch-solids flowing-fluid reactor that we find convenient 
to use depends on whether the deactivation expression daldt is concentration 
independent or not. When it is concentration independent, any type of batch- 
solids system may be used and can be analyzed simply, but when it is concentration 
dependent, then unless one particular type of reactor is used (that in which CA 
is forced to stay unchanged with time) the analysis of the experimental results 
becomes horrendously awkward and difficult. 
We treat these two classes of experimental devices in turn. 
Batch-Solids: Determining the Rate for Independent Deactivation 
Let us illustrate how to interpret experiments from the various batch-solids 
reactors of Fig. 21.1 and how to manipulate the basic performance equations for 
these reactors by testing the fit for the simplest of equation forms for indepen- 
dent deactivation. 
with 
This represents first-order reaction and first-order deactivation which, in addition, 
is concentration independent. 
Batch-Solids, Batch-Fluid. Here we need to develop an expression relating the 
changing gas concentration with time. Using time as the one independent variable 
throughout the run the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 become 


=== PDF PAGE 495 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 479 
Integrating Eq. 16 yields 
and for unit initial activity, or a, = 1, this becomes 
a = e - k d t  
Replacing Eq. 18 in Eq. 15 we then find 
and on separation and integration 
c, 
Wk' 
In-=- 
(1 - e - k d t )  
CA 
Vkd 
This expression shows that even at infinite time the concentration of reactant in 
an irreversible reaction does not drop to zero but is governed by the rate of 
reaction and of deactivation, or 
Combining the above two expression and rearranging then yields 
A plot as shown in Fig. 21.2 provides a test for this rate form. 
Figure 21.2 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch-solids, batch-fluid re- 
actor. 


=== PDF PAGE 496 ===
480 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
The batch-batch reactor becomes a practical device when the characteristic 
times for reaction and deactivation are of the same order of magnitude. If they 
are not and if deactivation is much slower, then CA, becomes very low and 
difficult to measure accurately. Fortunately, this ratio can be controlled by the 
experimenter by proper choice of WIV. 
Batch-Solids, Mixed Constant Flow of Fluid. Inserting the rate of Eq. 14a iuto 
the performance expression for mixed flow gives 
and on rearrangement 
In Eq. 24 the activity varies with the chronological time. To eliminate this quantity 
integrate Eq. 14b (see Eq. 18) and insert in Eq. 24. Thus 
Rearranging gives, in more useful form, 
This expression shows how the reactant concentration at the outlet rises with 
time, while the plot of Fig. 21.3 provides the test of this kinetic equation. If the 
Figure 21.3 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and steady- 
state mixed flow of fluids. 


=== PDF PAGE 497 ===
21.2 
The Rate and Performance Equations 481 
data fall on a straight line then the slope and intercept yield the two rate constants 
of Eq. 14. 
We should mention that this and the succeeding batch-solids derivations are 
based on the pseudo steady-state assumption. This assumes that conditions 
change slowly enough with time for the system to be at steady state at any 
instant. Since a batch of solids can only be used if deactivation is not too rapid 
this assumption is reasonable. 
Batch-Solids, Mixed Changing Flow of Fluid (to keep C, fixed). For steady 
flow in a mixed reactor we have found 
To keep CA constant the flow rate must be slowly changed with time. In fact, it 
must be lowered because the catalyst is deactivating. Hence the variables in this 
situation are r 1  and t. So, on rearranging we have 
Figure 21.4 shows how to test for the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 by this pro- 
cedure. 
Actually there is no particular advantage in using varying flow over constant 
flow when testing for the kinetics of Eq. 14 or any other independent deactivation. 
However, for other deactivation kinetics this reactor system is by far the most 
useful because it allows us to decouple the three factors C, T, and a and study 
them a pair at a time. 
lr kcreax 
in 
w-+,. flow 
~
2
7
 
Ir 
. 
- 
c~~ - c~ 
Intercept = In - 
k'CA 
Figure 21.4 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and chang- 
ing flow of fluid in a mixed reactor so as to 
keep C, constant. 


=== PDF PAGE 498 ===
482 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Figure 21.5 Test of the kinetic expressions 
of Eq. 14 using a batch of solids and steady- 
state plug flow of fluid. 
Batch-Solids, Plug Constant Flow of Fluid. For plug flow the performance 
equation combined with the rate of Eq. 14a becomes 
Integrating and replacing a by the expression of Eq. 18 gives 
which becomes, on rearrangement, 
Figure 21.5 shows how to test for the kinetics of Eq. 14, and how to evaluate 
the rate constants with data from this type of reactor. 
Batch-Solids, Plug Changing Flow of Fluid (to keep CA, 
out fixed). At any instant 
in the plug flow reactor Eq. 29 applies. Thus noting that r1 and t are the two 
variables we obtain, on suitable rearrangement, 
Figure 21.4, with one modification (the intercept given by the last term of Eq. 
31), shows how to test for the kinetic expressions of Eq. 14 with this device. 
So far we have illustrated how to use a batch, plug flow or mixed flow of fluid 
to search for the rate constants of a particular rate form, Eq. 14. 


=== PDF PAGE 499 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 483 
As long as the deactivation is concentration independent, the activity and 
concentration effects can be decoupled and any of the above experimental devices 
will give simple easy-to-interpret results. Thus the above analyses can be extended 
with no difficulty to any reaction order n and any deactivation order d, as long 
as m = 0, or for 
On the other hand, if the deactivation is concentration dependent, or m # 0, 
then the concentration and activity effects do not decouple and analysis becomes 
difficult unless the proper experimental device is used, one deliberately chosen 
so as to decouple these factors. Reactors which keep C, constant by slowing the 
flow rate of feed, as treated above, are such devices. They can be used to find 
the rate constants for the reactions 
as well as for parallel, series, and side-by-side deactivation [see Levenspiel 
(1972, 1996)l. 
How Pore Diffusion Resistance Distorts the Kinetics of Reactions with 
Deactivating Catalysts 
Consider the following rate scheme for reactions on spherical particles 
da 
1 where k'p, = k 
- - 
= kdad 
dt 
For no deactivation but with or without pore diffusion resistance these rate 
expressions become 
where 
& = 1 for no diffusional slowdown 
1 
1 
k '  for strong diffusional 
&=-, 
M,=L 
MT 


=== PDF PAGE 500 ===
484 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
With deactivation, Eq. 34 above becomes 
where 
L = 1 for no diffusional slowdown 
1 
1 
&
=
 
M - L  
for strong diffusional 
MT; 
Td - 
resistance 
Also as time passes, from Eq. 37, 
a=exp(-k,t) 
f o r d = l  
a = [I + (d - l)k,t]ll(l-d) 
for d # 1 
These expressions show that in the regime of strong pore diffusion resistance a 
decreases (see Eq. 39), causing MTd to also decrease. This means that 8 rises 
with time, as shown in Fig. 21.6. However a decreases faster than &rises so the 
reaction rate decreases with time. 
here 
Figure 21.6 Effectiveness factor increases with time as catalyst 
deactivates: batch Slplug flow G. 


=== PDF PAGE 501 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 485 
Table 21.1 Performance equations for plug flow Glbatch S, with the simple first 
order system of Eq. 14 
No Resistance to Pore Diffusion 
Strong Resistance to Pore Diffusion 
C
~
O
 
Without 
In - 
= k'7' 
CAO kt 7' 
In-=- 
deactivation 
(40) 
CA 
MT 
. (41) 
(Chapters 5, 18) 
(Chapter 18) 
c ~ O  
In - 
= (k'a)~' 
CAO (kla)+ 
In-=- 
With 
c A 
. (42) 
CA 
MTd 
deactivation 
. . (43) 
= k17' ' exp(-kdt) 
- k1 7' 
- - 
. -p(- y) 
MT 
Performance Equations in the Regime of Strong Diffusional Resistance 
There are so many different forms of deactivation rate, it is not worthwhile 
trying to present their performance equations. Let us illustrate what happens 
with just one rate form, the simplest, 
For batch Slplug flow G integration of the various diffusion deactivation regimes 
gives the values in Table 21.1. 
For given k ' ~ ' ,  in other words for given treatment rate, Fig. 21.7 shows that CA 
at the exit rises with time, or that conversion decreases with time. 
Figure 21.7 With deactivation and pore diffusional resistance 
reactor performance decreases with time. 
h 
Eq. 27 
k ' ~ '  
Eq. 42, slope = -kd ... no pore diffusion 
resistance 
kd 
Eq. 43, slope = -- ... strong resistance 
* 
to pore diffusion 
* t 


=== PDF PAGE 502 ===
486 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Comments 
(a) For mixed flow we get equations and charts identical to the above except 
for the following change 
(b) For other reaction orders and deactivation orders similar equations can 
be developed for the above four kinetic regimes. For example, for second- 
order reaction batch Slmixed flow G we have, with Eq. 18.28 
(c) Figure 21.7 for first-order systems shows that the conversion decreases 
more slowly in the presence of strong pore diffusion resistance than in the 
diffusion-free regime. This result should apply generally to all reactor types 
and reaction kinetics. 
INTERPRETING KINETIC DATA IN THE PRESENCE OF 
PORE DIFFUSION RESISTANCE AND DEACTIVATION 
I 
The catalytic decomposition of reactant (A+R) is studied in a packed bed 
reactor filled with 2.4-mm pellets and using a very high recycle rate of product 
gases (assume mixed flow). The results of a long-time run and additional data 
are given below. 
Find the kinetics of reaction and deactivation, both in the diffusion-free and in 
the strong pore diffusion resistance regime. 
Be = 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
I SOLUTION 
t, hr 
XA 
First of all, note that deactivation occurs during the run, so guess or try to fit 
the data with the simplest rate form for such situations, or 
O 
0.75 
0.64 
0.52 
0.39 
ps = 1500 kg/m3cat 
+ = 4000 kg s,m3 


=== PDF PAGE 503 ===
21.2 The Rate and Performance Equations 487 
The performance equations for this rate form and mixed flow are analogous to 
those for plug flow, shown in Table 21.1, 
In diffusion-free 
= k'T1a = ktT1e-kdl 
regime 
In strong diffusion 
a =  - 
regime 
(ii) 
see Eq. 38 
If this rate form is correct then for both strong or no diffusion resistance effects 
c*, 
a plot of in (c 
- 1) vs t should give a straight line. Making this tabulation 
and plot, as shown in Fig. E21.1 shows that the above rate form fits the data. 
k 
Intercept = I .  1 
1.2 
0 
0.75 
3 
1.10 
2 
0.64 
1.78 
0.58 
Slope = -0.26 
4 
0.52 
1.08 
0.08 
6 
0.39 
0.64 
-0.45 
0.4 
-0.4 1 
/This 
is a good straight line; hence, 
\ the guessed rate form fits the data. 
Figure E21.1 
Let us next see whether the reactor is operating in the diffusion-free or strong 
diffusion regime. 
Guess No Intrusion of Diffusional Resistances. Then from Eq. (i) we have 
In - 
- 1 = In (k'd) - kdt 
(2 1 
From Fig. E21.1 
m3 
the intercept = 1.1 } thus [ 
kt = 7.5 x 
kgas 
the slope = -0.26 
kd = 0.26 hr-l 


=== PDF PAGE 504 ===
488 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Now check the Thiele modulus to verify that we really are in the diffusion 
resistance free regime. Thus at t = 0 
Unfortunately, this value indicates strong resistance to pore diffusion. This con- 
tradicts our starting assumption, so our original guess was wrong. 
Guess That the Runs Were Made in the Regime of Strong Resistance to Pore 
Diffusion. Then Eq. (ii) becomes 
From Fig. E21.1 we have 
the intercept = 1.1 
the slope = -0.26 
kd = 0.52 hr-l 
From the value for the intercept 
we find 
Check the Thiele modulus at t = 0 
This value of Thiele modulus represents strong pore diffusional resistance. This 
is consistent with our original guess. 
Hence the final rate equations: 
(a) In the diffusion-free regime (for very small d,) with deactivation 
mol 
da 
-rk = 0.27 C,a, - 
. . with . - . - - 
= 0.52 a, hr-I 
kg-s 
dt 


=== PDF PAGE 505 ===
21.3 Design 489 
(b) In the strong pore digusion resistance regime (for large d,) with deacti- 
vation 
-rA = 0.27 C,a& 
... with ... 
- - 
da - 
- 0.52 a 
f 
dt 
combining all gives 
mol 
3 
lo-' CAal", - 
. . 
-,-i = - 
da 
L 
with . . - - 
= 0.52 a, hr-l 
kgas 
dt 
Note: In the strong pore diffusion regime the rate is lower but the catalyst 
deactivates more slowly. Actually, for the catalyst used here if we could have 
been free of diffusional resistances reaction rates would have been 360 times 
as fast as those measured. 
Reflection on this example leaves us with the impression that even with the 
simplest of rate forms the analysis is quite involved. It suggests that it is not 
worthwhile in this general text to try to treat more complicated rate forms. 
21.3 DESIGN 
When reacting fluid flows through a batch of deactivating catalyst the conversion 
drops progressively during the run, and steady state conditions cannot be main- 
tained. If conditions change slowly with time, then the average conversion during 
a run can be found by calculating the steady-state conversion at various times 
and summing over time. In symbols, then, 
When conversion drops too low the run is terminated, the catalyst is either 
discarded or regenerated, and the cycle is repeated. Example 21.2 illustrates this 
type of calculation. 
There are two important and real problems with deactivating catalysts. 
The operational problem: how to best operate a reactor during a run. Since 
temperature is the most important variable affecting reaction and deactivation 
this problem reduces to finding the best temperature progression during the run. 
The regeneration problem: when to stop a run and either discard or regenerate 
the catalyst. This problem is easy to treat once the first problem has been solved 
for a range of run times and final catalyst activities. (Note: each pair of values 
for time and final activity yields the corresponding mean conversion.) 


=== PDF PAGE 506 ===
490 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
XA decreases with time as 
Constant flow 
catalyst deactivates. 
Thus FR decreases with time 
Isothermal 
XA and composition stay 
Flow decreases with 
constant. However, FR 
time so as to keep 
decreases with time. 
XA constant. 
XA and FR are kept 
Constant molar 
4 
@ 
constant. 
flow 
Temperature is boosted 
to keep XA constant. 
Figure 21.8 Three possible reactor policies for a batch of deactivat- 
ing catalyst. 
The operational problem has been solved analytically for a rather general 
family of kinetic equations: 
Note the restriction here, that deactivation is concentration independent. 
Consider the operational problem. For rather slow deactivation we can use a 
batch of catalyst with a choice of running the reactor in one of three ways, as 
shown in Fig. 21.8. Whatever policy is chosen the performance equations for the 
rates of Eqs. 41 and 42 are obtained by solving the following expressions: 
with 
The integrated performance equations take on a whole host of forms 
for plug or mixed flow 
for n = 1,2, . . . 
for d = 0, 1, 2, 3 
Some of these are given in Chapter 32 of Levenspiel (1996). We do not present 
them here. 
In general we can evaluate zA 
b solving Eq. 40 with Eqs. 43 and 44. Referring 
to Fig. 21.8 we see that for case 6 a decreases with time, and so does XA. For 


=== PDF PAGE 507 ===
21.3 Design 491 
case a 
a decreases with time so the feed rate must also be lowered so that at 
any time 
. , ,  
a 
AO, inihal 
Nearly always we find that case @ is optimum. Here Eq. 43 becomes 
constant 
constant 
so klaCA, should remain constant as the temperature is raised. This means that 
in the regime of no pore diffusion resistance we must change T with time such that 
ideal gases with 
nth-order reactions 
In the regime of strong resistance to pore diffusion we must change T with time 
such that 
klaCBe = constant . - . for liquids 
ideal gases and 
nth-order reactions 
Discussion 
The overall problem is finding which policy @ a 
@ is best. We have the 
following findings: 
(a) For the longest run time for given FA and for any a,,,, if the deactivation 
is very temperature sensitive compared to reaction, then the optimal policy 
is a rising temperature with time so as to keep the conversion from the 
reactor unchanged, thus use policy @, ending the run at the maximum 
allowable temperature P, 
as shown in Fig. 21.9, see Szepe (1966, 1968, 
1971). 
(b) If deactivation is less temperature sensitive than is the reaction use policy 
@ or a 
whichever is more convenient, but make the run at the maximum 
allowable temperature T*. 
(c) For deactivations which are concentration dependent the catalyst activity 
will vary with position in the reactor. The optimum requires that the 
temperature vary with position along the reactor as well as with time. This 
is a difficult situation to analyze. 


=== PDF PAGE 508 ===
492 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
/- 
Maximum allowable temperature 
Constant XA 
I 
1 
trun 
trun 
Starting T 
Correct 
Starting T 
is too low 
starting T 
is too high 
(a) 
(b) 
(4 
Figure 21.9 These sketches show the correct and incorrect starting temperatures for policy @. 
(d) For catalysts which deactivate very rapidly packed bed reactors are imprac- 
tical, and one has to use solid-flow systems. We do not treat these here. 
Such systems are treated in Chapter 33 of Levenspiel (1996). 
DEACTIVATION IN A PACKED BED REACTOR 
We plan to run an isomerization of A to R in a packed bed reactor (pure A 
feed, FA, = 5 kmollhr, W = 1-ton catalyst, T = 3 atm, T = 730 K). The catalyst 
deactivates so we plan to make 120 day runs, then regenerate the catalyst. 
(a) Plot conversion and activity versus time for the run 
(b) find & for the 120 day run 
The rate of reaction with CA in mol/m3 is described by 
mol A 
= 0.2 Cia kg cat. hr 
I 
and the rate of deactivation is given by 
I 
(a) . . . --- 
da - 8.3125 X lo-', 
day-' 
dt 
This expression represents poisoning by a feed impurity. 
da 
(b) . . . - - 
= 10-3(CA + C,)a, 
day-l 
dt 
This represents poisoning by both reactant and by product, thus pore 
diffusion resistance does not influence the deactivation rate. 
(c). . . - - -  
da - 3.325 a', 
day-l 
dt 
This represents fairly strong pore diffusion resistance. 
da 
( d ) .  . . - - -  
dt - 666.5 a3, 
day-' 
This represents very strong pore diffusion resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 509 ===
21.3 Design 493 
SOLUTION 
In general for parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) we can write 
mol A 
- r i  = 0.2 Cia kg cat. hr 
PAO - 
3 atm 
mol 
CAo=-- 
= 50- 
m3. atm 
m3 
RT 
(82.06 x - 
mol . K 
(1000 kg) (so 2) 
kg. hr 
= 10- m3 
(5000 e) 
or on rearranging 
Let us now replace the activity term in Eq. (i). 
Part (a) 
or 
a = 1 - 8.3125 X 
t 
(ii) 
Replacing Eq. (ii) in Eq. (i) and evaluating XA at various values of t gives the 
topmost curve shown in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (b) Separating and integrating - - 
= 10-3(CA + C,)a gives 
dt 


=== PDF PAGE 510 ===
494 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
I 
4 
Time, days 
Figure E21.2 Decrease in conversion as a function of time for various 
deactivation orders. 
Replacing Eq. (iii) in Eq. (i) and evaluating X, at various t values gives the 
corresponding curve in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (c) Separating and integrating - - 
= 3.325 a2 gives 
dt 
Again, replacing Eq. (iv) in (i) gives the corresponding curve in Fig. E21.2. 
da 
Part (d) Separating and integrating -- = 666.5 a3 gives 
dt 
1 
Combining Eq. (v) in (i) gives the lowest curve shown in Fig. E21.2. 


=== PDF PAGE 511 ===
Problems 495 
From Fig. E21.2 we find by graphical integration that for the 120-day period, 
XA ,,,,,, = 0.99, X, ,, 
= 0.20 for 
d = 0 the mean conversion 
FA 
= 0.96 
d = 1 the mean conversion 
X, = 0.73 
d = 2 the mean conversion 
FA 
= 0.40 
d = 3 the mean conversion 
XA = 0.30 
I 
It also clearly shows how different is the progress of the reaction with the different 
orders of deactivation. 
REFERENCES 
Levenspiel, O., J. Catal., 25, 265 (1972). 
, 
Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Szepe, S., Ph.D. Thesis, Illinois Institute of Technology, 1966; also see Szepe, S., and 0 .  
Levenspiel, Chem. Eng. Sci., 23, 881 (1968); "Catalyst Deactivation," p. 265, Fourth 
European Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering, Brussels, September 1968, 
Pergamon, London, 1971. 
PROBLEMS 
The kinetics of a particular catalytic reaction A + R are studied at temperature 
T in a basket reactor (batch-solids and mixed flow of gas) in which the gas 
composition is kept unchanged, despite deactivation of the catalyst. What can 
you say about the rates of reaction and deactivation from the results of the 
following runs? Note, to keep the gas concentration in the reactor unchanged 
the flow rate of reactant had to be lowered to about 5% of the initial value. 
21.1. . . . Run 1 
CAo = 1 mollliter 
t, time from start of run, hr 
0 1 2 
3 
XA = 0.5 
rl, gm cat. minlliter 
1 
1 e 
e2 e3 
Run 2 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.667 
rl, gm cat. minlliter l
o
l
z
3
 
2 
2e 
2e2 2e3 
21.2. . . . Run 1 
CAo = 2 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.5 
rl, gm.min/liter 


=== PDF PAGE 512 ===
496 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
Run 2 
C, 
= 20 mollliter 
t, hr 
XA = 0.8 
TI, gm.min/liter 
21.3. In an automobile's catalytic converter, CO and hydrocarbons present in 
the exhaust gases are oxidized. Unfortunately the effectiveness of these 
units decreases with use. The phenomenon was studied by Summers and 
Hegedus in J. Catalysis, 51, 185 (1978) by means of an accelerated aging 
test on a palladium impregnated porous pellet packed bed converter. 
From the reported data on hydrocarbon conversion shown below, develop 
an expression to represent the deactivation rate of this catalyst. 
This problem was prepared by Dennis Timberlake. 
21.4. A recycle reactor with very high recycle ratio is used to study the kinetics 
of a particular irreversible catalytic reaction, A --+ R. For a constant flow 
rate of feed (7' = 2 kg. seclliter) the following data are obtained: 
Time after start of operation, hr 
1 
2 
4 
XA 
1 
0.889 
0.865 
0.804 
The progressive drop in conversion suggests that the catalyst deactivates 
with use. Find rate equations for the reaction and for the deactivation 
which fit these data. 
21.5. The reversible catalytic reaction 
proceeds with decaying catalyst in a batch reactor (batch-solids, batch- 
fluid). What can you say of the kinetics of reaction and deactivation from 
the following data: 
21.6. The following data on an irreversible reaction are obtained with decaying 
catalyst in a batch reactor (batch-solids, batch-fluid) What can you say 
about the kinetics 
21.7. With fresh catalyst the packed bed reactor is run at 600K. Four weeks 
later when the temperature reaches 800K the reactor is shut down to 
reactivate the catalyst. In addition, at any instant the reactor is isothermal. 


=== PDF PAGE 513 ===
Problems 497 
Assuming optimal operations what is the activity of the catalyst at the 
time of reactivation. 
Data: The rate of reaction with fresh catalyst is 
The rate of deactivation is unknown. 
Our reaction A - t R  proceeds isothermally in a packed bed of large, 
slowly deactivating catalyst particles and is performing well in the strong 
pore diffusion regime. With fresh pellets conversion is 88%; however, 
after 250 days conversion drops to 64%. How long can we run the reactor 
before conversion drops to 
It has been suggested that we replace these large particles with very small 
particles so as to operate wholly in the diffusion-free regime and thus use 
less catalyst for the same conversions. How long a run time can we expect 
before the conversion drops from 88% to 64% if the catalyst is used in 
21.9. . . . a packed bed reactor? 
21.10. . . . a fluidized solids reactor (assume mixed flow of fluid)? 
21.11. Under conditions of strong pore diffusion the reaction A --+ R proceeds 
at 700°C on a slowly deactivating catalyst by a first-order rate 
-ra = 0.030 CAa, 
[mollgm min] 
Deactivation is caused by strong absorption of unavoidable and irremov- 
able trace impurities in the feed, giving third-order deactivation kinetics, 
or 
We plan to feed a packed bed reactor (W = 10 kg) with u = 100 liters1 
min of fresh A at 8 atm and 700°C until the catalyst activity drops to 10% 
of the fresh catalyst, then regenerate the catalyst and repeat the cycle, 
(a) What is the run time for this operation? 
(b) What is the mean conversion for the run? 
21.12. In catalytic dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons the catalyst activity decays 
with use because of carbon deposition on the active surfaces. Let us study 
this process in a specific system. 


=== PDF PAGE 514 ===
498 
Chapter 21 Deactivating Catalysts 
A gaseous feed (10% C, HI, - 90% inerts, ?T = 1 atm, T = 555°C) flows 
(7' = 1.1 kg. hr/m3) through a packed bed of alumina-chromia catalyst. 
The butane decomposes by a first-order reaction 
C,HIo4 C,H,-carbon 
\ 
other gases 
and the behavior with time is as follows: 
Examination of the 0.55-mm pellets shows the same extent of carbon 
deposition at the entrance and the exit of the reactor, suggesting concentra- 
tion independent deactivation. Develop rate equations for reaction and 
deactivation. 
This problem was devised from the information given by Kunugita et 
al., J. Chem. Eng. (Japan), 2, 75 (1969). 
The enzyme catalase effectively decomposes hydrogen peroxide 
catalase 
1 
H202 - 
H20 + - 0, 
2 
and the kinetics of this reaction are to be evaluated from an experiment 
in which dilute H202 flows through a packed bed of kieselguhr particles 
impregnated with immobilized enzyme. 
From the following data, reported by Krishnaswamy and Kitterell, 
AZChE J., 28, 273 (1982), develop rate expressions to represent this 
decomposition, both in the diffusion free regime and in the strong pore 
diffusion regime, for the catalyst at hand. Note that the conversion de- 
creases with time in all runs showing that the catalyst deactivates with use. 
21.13. . . . run E (modified) 
Elapsed Time, hr 
XA 
0 
1.25 
r1 = 4100 kg cat. s/m3 
2.0 
zp = 72 2 
3.0 
p, = 630 kg/m3 cat 
4.25 
Se = 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 


=== PDF PAGE 515 ===
Problems 499 
21.14. . . . run B 
T' = 4560 kg cat. s/m3 
- 
d, = 1.45 X 10-3m 
p, = 630 kg/m3 cat 
9, 
= 5 X 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
Elapsed Time, hr 
XA 
0.25 
0.57 
1 .O 
0.475 
2.0 
0.39 
3.0 
0.30 
4.0 
0.23 
5.0 
0.186 
6.0 
0.14 
7.0 
0.115 
21.15. At 730K the isomerization of A to R (rearrangement of atoms in the 
molecule) proceeds on a slowly deactivating catalyst with a second-order 
rate 
-ri = k'Cia = 200 Cia, [mol Alhr . gm cat] 
Since reactant and product molecules are similar in structure, deactivation 
is caused by both A and R. With diffusional effects absent, the rate of 
deactivation is found to be 
We plan to operate a packed bed reactor containing W = 1 metric ton 
of catalyst for 12 days using a steady feed of pure A, FA, = 5 kmollhr at 
730 K and 3 atm (CAo = 0.05 mollliter). 
(a) First evaluate -da/dt, d ,  and then the general expression for 1 - XA. 
(b) What is the conversion at the start of the run? 
(c) What is the conversion at the end of the run? 
(d) What is the average conversion over the 12-day run? 


=== PDF PAGE 516 ===
Chapter 22 
G/L Reactions on Solid 
Catalysts: Trickle Beds, Slurry 
Reactors, and Three-Phase 
Fluidized Beds 
These multiphase reactions are of the type 
dissolve 
on solid 
and they can be run in a number of ways, as shown in Fig. 22.1. The packed bed 
contactors use large solid particles, the slurry reactors very fine suspended solids, 
while the fluidized bed can use either depending on the flow rates. 
Flow pattern: Overall, all other things equal (which they are not) countercur- 
rent plug flow is the most desirable flow pattern while the worst of all in terms 
of driving forces is mixedlmixed flow. 
22.1 THE GENERAL RATE EQUATION 
Consider the following reaction and stoichiometry 
on catalyst 
A(g -+ 1) + bB(1) =products 
. 
- ut - ,ye c 
-r; 
= -~;;'/b. . 
Y A -  
A A 
B 
mol A/m3 cat. s 
where 
-r;= 
klCACB 
kg= k;;'lb. . .mf/molB.m3cat.s 


=== PDF PAGE 517 ===
22.1 The General Rate Equation 501 
Trickle 
High velocity 
Packed or 
bed 
flow. L is 
fixed bed: 
blown through 
by the gas. 
Suspended 
particles: 
Agitated slurry 
reactor 
(suspended 
fine solids) 
'L Rising 
bubbles 
/ Sd:91i$T 
through L 
containing fine 
suspended 
solids). 
@ 
Three-phase fluidized bed. these vary widely in G/L 
ratio from G bubbling through an L slurry to a 
G fluidized bed of damp particles. 
Figure 22.1 Various ways of running GIL reactions catalyzed by solids. 
Gas reactant must first dissolve in the L, then both reactants must diffuse or 
move to the catalyst surface for reaction to occur. Thus the resistance to transfer 
across the GIL interface and then to the surface of solid both enter the general 
rate expression. 
To develop the rate equation, let us draw on the two-film theory, and let us 
use the following nomenclature: 
PA , Henry's law constant [Pa 
m311moll 
Typical element 
gas-liquid interfacial area 
of volume contain 
a. = 
volume of reactor 
G, 
L, and S. 
, a, = external surface of particles 
for 
6fs 
volume of reactor 
spheres d, 
volume Of particles, called solid loading 
= volume of reactor 
volume Of liquid called liquid holdup 
.' = volume of reactor' 


=== PDF PAGE 518 ===
502 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions o n  Solid Catalysts 
Gas fllm coeff~cient 
Liquid fllm coef 
coefflc~ents L?OAe, EDs, [m31/m cat . sl 
Centerl~ne of pellet 
Figure 22.2 Sketch showing the resistances involved in the GIL reaction on a catalyst 
surface. 
Graphically we show the resistances as in Fig. 22.2. We can then write the 
following general rate equations: 
For A: 
1 
these rates 
with rate constant (kAmCB) 
Henry's law constant 
HA = PA/ CA 
For B: 
k -Y; 
= 
1 
+ 
1 
C B ~  
for the first order reaction of B 
with rate constant (kgcA) 
Now either Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 should give the rate of reaction. Unhappily, even 
with all the system parameters known (k, a, f, etc.) we still cannot solve these 
expressions without trial and error because rB 
is not known in Eq. 2 and FA is 
not known in Eq. 3. However, we usually encounter either of two simplifying 
extremes, which are very useful. 
Extreme 1: CBl B CAP In systems with pure liquid B and slightly soluble gas 
A we can take 
- 
CBs = CB,within 
pellet = CBr - . . same value everywhere 


=== PDF PAGE 519 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 503 
With C, constant the reaction becomes first order with respect to A overall and 
the above rate expressions with their required trial and error all reduce to one 
directly solvable expression 
Lfirst-order 
rate 
constant for A 
Extreme 2: CBl G CAI. In systems with dilute liquid reactant B, highly soluble 
A, and high pressure, we can take 
- . throughout the reactor 
CAI = X, 
The rate then becomes first order with respect to B and reduces to 
-rg = 
1 
+ 
1 
CBl 
mol ~ / r n ~  
reactom 
& 
first-order rate constant which 
is used to calculate gB 
How to Test Whether these Extremes Apply, and Other Comments 
(a) By the unequal signs 
or G we mean two or three times as large. 
(b) More generally compare the rates calculated from Eqs. 4 and 5 and use 
the smaller one. Thus, 
if r&, 4 r&, , , then C,, is in excess and extreme 1 applies. 
if r &, , 
a r&, 5, then Eq. 5 gives the rate of reaction. 
(c) Nearly always does one or other of the extremes apply. 
22.2 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR AN EXCESS OF B 
All types of contactors-trickle 
beds, slurry reactors, and fluidized beds-can 
be treated at the same time. What is important is to recognize the flow patterns 
of the contacting phases and which component, A or B, is in excess. First consider 
an excess of B. Here the flow pattern of liquid is not important. We only have 
to consider the flow pattern of the gas phase. So we have the following cases. 


=== PDF PAGE 520 ===


=== PDF PAGE 521 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 505 
22.4, we can write 
where 
pA(rir, - pAO) dilute pArO dilute 
pA 
1 - X A =  
-- 
- 
P A O ( ~  - P A )  
only P A O ~  
a = const. PAO 
and 
n(rO - pAO) dpA dilute rO dpA dilute 
dpA 
-dXA = 
-- 
P A O ( ~  - P A ) ~  
pAOr a = const. pAo 
Overall, around the whole reactor 
Mixed Flow GIBatch L (excess of B) 
With throughflow of L its composition stays roughly constant when B is in excess. 
However, with a batch of L its composition slowly changes with time as B is 
being used up, but B is roughly constant in the reactor at any time, as shown in 
Fig. 22.5. Here the material balance at any time t becomes 
l ncreases 
with time 
XA. exit! PA 
x A , e x i t , ~ a t t = ~ } /  
' '  
XA, exit, f at t = tf 
Batch volume V, 
CEO at t = 0 
CBf at t = tf 
Figure 22.5 Gas bubbles through a batch of liquid, B in 
excess. 


=== PDF PAGE 522 ===
506 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
1 
- 
(-r;) 
ith Eq. 12 the area 
or 
1 
- 
XA, exit 
Figure 22.6 Evaluation of the reaction 
time for a batch of liquid. 
The general procedure for finding the processing time is as follows: 
Then from I1 and 111. or I and I1 solve for t 
as shown in Fig. 22.6. 
From I and I1 
calculate 
XA, 
exit, o 
- 
- 
XA, 
exit, f 
Pick a number 
of CB values 
c~~ 
- 
- 
C B ~  
Plug Flow GIBatch L (excess of B) 
From I11 
calculate 
(-TA)O 
- 
- 
(-rAIf 
As with the previous case, CB changes slowly with time; however, any element 
of gas sees the same CB as it flows through the reactor, as shown in Fig. 22.7. 
Increases 
[with 
time 
with time 
Consider a slice 
-Same CB everywhere. 
It can be circulated if 
wanted. However CB 
decreases with time 
as B is used up 
Figure 22.7 Plug flow of gas through a batch of 
liquid. 


=== PDF PAGE 523 ===
22.2 Performance Equations for an Excess of B 507 
Consider a slice of contactor in a short time interval in which CB is practically 
unchanged. Then a material balance gives 
FAO dXA = (-r'f)dVr 
(13) 
Integrating gives the exit conversion of A 
Considering B we may now write 
and on integrating we find the processing time to be 
The procedure is as follows: 
Then solve Eq. 15 graphically to find the time as shown in Fig. 22.8. 
Choose CB 
CBO 
- 
- 
c ~ f  
C ~ ,  
fixed 
C ~ O  
Solve Eq. 14 
to Give XA, 
XA, exit (t = 0) 
- 
- 
XA, exit (at t )  
Figure 22.8 Evaluation of the reac- 
tion time in a batch L reactor. 


=== PDF PAGE 524 ===
508 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
Batch 
L 
L 
Figure 22.9 Pure gaseous A can be recompressed and recycled. 
Special Case of Pure Gaseous A (excess of B) 
One often encounters this situation, especially in hydrogenations. Here one 
usually recycles the gas, in which case pA and CA stay unchanged; hence, the 
preceding equations for both batch and flow systems simplify enormously, see 
Fig. 22.9. When solving problems, it is suggested that one write down the basic 
material balances and then carefully see what simplifications apply . . . is pA 
constant? . . . and so on. 
Comments The rate expressions used so far have been first order with respect 
to A and first order with respect to B. But how do we deal with more general 
rate forms, for example: 
To be able to combine the chemical step with the mass transfer steps in simple 
fashion, we must replace the above awkward rate equation with a first-order 
approximation, as follows: 
-ri 
= kic: C? + -'/ = [(k '"Cm)C2 -I] cA 
(17) 
mean values "I; 
at 
locations where 
reaction occurs 
This approach is not completely satisfactory, but it is the best we can do. Thus, 
instead of Eq. 4, the rate form to be used in all the performance expressions 
will be 


=== PDF PAGE 525 ===
22.4 Which Kind of Contactor to Use 509 
22.3 PERFORMANCE EQUATIONS FOR AN EXCESS OF A 
Here the flow pattern of gas is of no concern. All we need to worry about is the 
flow pattern of liquid. 
Plug Flow LIAny Flow G (tower and packed bed operations) 
Making the material balances gives on integration 
L.- 
given by Eq. s 
Mixed Flow LIAny Flow G (tank operations of all types) 
Here the performance equation is simply 
( 
given by Eq. 5 
Batch LIAny Flow G 
Noting that C, = constant throughout time (because it is in excess), the perfor- 
mance equation for B becomes 
22.4 WHICH KIND OF CONTACTOR TO USE 
The selection of a good contactor depends on 
* where the controlling resistance lies in the rate expression, 
the advantages of one contacting pattern over another, and 
the difference in auxiliary equipment needed. 
The overall economics which accounts for these three factors will determine 
which set up and reactor type is best. Let us briefly look at these factors in turn. 


=== PDF PAGE 526 ===
510 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
The Rate: We should favor the contactor which favors the weakest step in the 
rate. For example, 
if the main resistance lies in the GIL film, use a contactor with large interfacial 
surface area. 
if the resistance lies at the LIS boundary, use a large exterior surface of 
solid, thus large f, or small particles. 
if the resistance to pore diffusion intrudes, use tiny particles. 
From prediction we can find the weakest step by inserting all transfer coeffi- 
cients (kg, k,, . . .) and system parameters (a,, a,, . . .) into the rate equation 
and then see which resistance term dominates. Unfortunately, the values for 
these quantities usually are not well known. 
From experiment, we can change one or another factor in the rate expression; 
for example, 
solid loading (this changes f, alone, hence, only changes the last resistance 
term in the rate expression) 
size of catalyst particle (affects both Band a,) 
intensity of agitation of the liquid (affects the mass transfer terms in the rate) 
TIT, CB,PA. 
This should tell which factor strongly affects the rate and which does not. 
Boosting the weakest step in the rate by a proper choice of particle size, solid 
loading and reactor type can strongly affect the overall economics of the process. 
Contacting: Plug flow of the limiting component, the one which is not in excess, 
is certainly better than mixed flow. However, except for very high conversions 
this factor is of minor importance. 
Supporting equipment: Slurry reactors can use very fine catalyst particles, and 
this can lead to problems of separating catalyst from liquid. Trickle beds don't 
have this problem, and this is the big advantage of trickle beds. Unfortunately, 
these large particles in trickle beds mean much lower reaction rates. With regard 
to rate, the trickle bed can only hold its own 
for very slow reactions on porous solids where pore diffusion limitations do 
not appear, even for large particles and 
for very fast reactions on nonporous catalyst-coated particles. 
Overall, the trickle bed is simpler, the slurry reactor usually has a higher rate, 
and the fluidized bed is somewhere in between. 
22.5 APPLICATIONS 
Here is a short list of applications of these reactors. 
* The catalytic hydrogenation of petroleum fractions to remove sulfur impuri- 
ties. Hydrogen is very soluble in the liquid; high pressure is used while the 
impurity is present in the liquid in low concentration. All these factors tend 
to lead to extreme 2 (excess of A). 


=== PDF PAGE 527 ===
22.5 Applications 511 
The catalytic oxidation of liquid hydrocarbons with air or oxygen. Since 
oxygen is not very soluble in the liquid, while the hydrocarbon could well 
be present in high concentration we could end up in extreme 1 (excess of B). 
The removal of dissolved organics from industrial waste water by catalytic 
oxidation as an alternative to biooxidation. Here oxygen is not very soluble 
in water, but the organic waste is also present in low concentration. It is 
therefore not clear in what regime the kinetics lie. The catalytic oxidation 
of phenol is an example of such an operation. 
0 The removal of airborne pollutants by adsorption and/or reaction. These 
operations usually lead to extreme 1 (excess of B). 
The illustrative examples and many of the problems which follow are adapted 
from or are extensions of problems prepared by Ramachandran and Choud- 
hary (1980). 
HYDROGENATION OF ACETONE IN A PACKED 
BUBBLE COLUMN 
Aqueous acetone (C,, = 1000 mol/m3 1, v, = 
m3 11s) and hydrogen (1 atm, 
v, = 0.04 m3 gls, HA = 36845 Pa.m3 Ilmol) are fed to the bottom of a long, 
slender column (5-m high, 0.1-m2 cross section) packed with porous Raney nickel 
catalyst (d, = 5 x 
m cat, p, = 4500 kg/m3 cat, f, = 0.6, ge = 8 X 10-lo m3 
Ilm cat. s) and kept at 14"C, as shown in Fig. E22.1. At these conditions acetone 
is hydrogenated to propanol according to the reaction 
on 
H, (g -1) + CH3COCH3(I) cataly;t CH3CHOHCH3 
-- 
---------- 
(A) 
(B) 
I 
with rate given by 
What will be the conversion of acetone in this unit? 
Additional Data 
The mass transfer rate constants are estimated to be 
the sum of the gas + liquid film conductances 


=== PDF PAGE 528 ===
5u 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
I 
I 
9, 
= 8 x 10-lo m31/m cat. s 
5 m 
(of l ~ q u ~ d  
in porus catalyst) 
-ri = rk = k'~;'*, mollkg cat . 
s 
k' = 2.35 X 
(rn31/kgcat . 
s) . (mol1m~1)~'~ 
..... 
pAO 
= 1 atm 
Hydrogen 
CBO = 100 rnol/rn31 
v, = 0.04 m3& 
Figure E22.1 
SOLUTION 
Before rushing to our equations to do the appropriate integrations needed for 
plug flow, let us consider the situation 
CBo = 1000 while CA is given by Henry's law as 
Comparing values shows that C, 9 CA; hence, we are in extreme 1 (excess 
of B). 
Next, we are dealing with pure hydrogen; thus, pA is constant throughout 
the packed column. And since the rate is only dependent on CA and not 
on CB, this means that the rate of reaction is constant throughout the 
column. 


=== PDF PAGE 529 ===
22.5 Applications 513 
Let us next look at the rate. From Eq. 18.28 we have for a half order reaction 
Replacing all known values into Eq. 18 gives 
= 0.0317 mol/m3 r . s 
Next, to the material balance of Eq. 11. With constant rate this becomes 
(not particularly 
use this term in which 
useful 
Fso = v,CBo = 
(1000) = 0.1 molls 
Thus on rearranging 
= 0.158, or 16% conversion 
HYDROGENATION OF A BATCH OF BUTYNEDIOL IN A 
SLURRY REACTOR 
I 
Hydrogen gas is bubbled into an agitated tank (V, = 2 m3r) containing liquid 
butynediol (CBQ = 2500 mol/m3 1) plus a dilute suspension of palladium-impreg- 
nated porous catalyst pellets (d, = 5 X 
m cat, p, = 1450 kg/m3 cat, ge = 
5 x 10-lo m3 Urn cat .s, f, = 0.0055). Hydrogen dissolves in the liquid (HA = 


=== PDF PAGE 530 ===
514 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
Unused H2 is 
recompressed and 
Butynediol --t butenediol 
Porous catalyst 
d, = 50 prn 
p, = 1450 kg/rn3 
9, 
= 5 x 10-lo m31/m cat. s 
f, = 0.0055 
Find t for 90% conversion to butenediol 
Figure E22.2~ 
148 000 Pa.m3 llmol) and reacts with the butynediol on the catalyst surface as 
follows (see Fig. E22.2~): 
on 
H, (g + 1) + butynediol(1) - 
butynediol 
-- 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
and at 35°C 
-,a 
= klCACB 
and 
k' = 5 x 
m6 llkg am01 cat s 
Unused hydrogen is recompressed and recirculated, and the whole operation 
takes place at 1.46 atm and 35°C. 
Find out how long it will take for 90% conversion of reactant. 
I 
Additional Data 
I 
The mass transfer rates are given as 
I 
the sum of the gas and liquid films 
I SOLUTION 
First compare CA and CB: 
PA 
1.46(101 325) = 10 mol/m3 1 
1 
Both at the beginning and 
c A =  =-= 
HA 
148 000 
at the end of the batch run 
CB + CA; therefore, the 
CBo = 2500 and CBf = 250 mol/m3 I 
system is in extreme 1. 


=== PDF PAGE 531 ===
22.5 Applications 515 
Although C, stays constant throughout the batch run, CB does not, so we will 
have a changing rate with time and with CB. Therefore, let us evaluate the rate 
at any particular value of CB. 
therefore, 
and 
Replacing in the rate expression of Eq. 18 gives 
(ii) 
Choose a 
Number of 
MT from 
8, from 
- r,"' from 
CB Values 
Eq. 6) 
Eq. 18.6 
Eq. (ii) 
I/(-r,"') 
2500 
5 
0.19 
0.8105 
1.23 
1000 
3.16 
0.29 
0.6367 
1.57 
250 
1.58 
0.5 
0.3687 
2.71 
Now from Eq. 12 the reaction time is given by 
With b = 1 and Vl = V,, making the plot of Fig. E22.2b, and taking the area 
under the curve gives 
t = 3460 s, or 58 min 


=== PDF PAGE 532 ===
516 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions on Solid Catalysts 
td 
Data points from the table 
Figure E22.2b 
REFERENCE 
Ramachandran, P. A., and Choudry, V. R., Chem. Eng., p. 74 (December 1, 1980). 
PROBLEMS 
22.1. Trickle bed oxidation. Dilute aqueous ethanol (about 2-3%) is oxidized 
to acetic acid by the action of pure oxygen at 10 atm in a trickle bed reactor 
packed with palladium-alumina catalyst pellets and kept at 30°C. According 
to Sato et al., Proc. First Pacific Chem. Eng. Congress, Kyoto, p. 197,1972, 
the reaction proceeds as follows: 
on 
02(g -+I) + CH3CH20H(I) - 
CH3COOH(I) + H20 
------- ---------- 
(A) 
(B) 
with rate 
Find the fractional conversion of ethanol to acetic acid if gas and liquid 
are fed to the top of a reactor in the following system: 
Gas stream: 
vg = 0.01 m3/s, HA = 86 000 Pa-m3/mol 
Liquid stream: v, = 2 X 
m3/s, CBo = 400 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
5 m high, 
0.1 m2 cross section, f, = 0.58 
Catalyst: 
d, = 5 mm, 
p, = 1800 kg/m3 
Be = 4.16 x 10-lo m3/m cat. s 
Kinetics: 
kAga, = 3 x 
mol/m3. Pa. s, 
kA,ai = 0.02 s-l 
k,, = 3.86 x 
m/s 


=== PDF PAGE 533 ===
Problems 517 
22.2. Slurry column oxidation. Instead of using a trickle bed reactor for ethanol 
oxidation (see previous problem), let us consider using a slurry reactor. 
For this type of unit 
Take all flows and other values from the previous problem, and then find 
the expected fractional conversion of ethanol in this reactor. 
22.3. Slurry tank hydrogenation. Predict the conversion of glucose to sorbitol 
in a stirred slurry reactor using pure hydrogen gas at 200 atm and 150°C. 
The catalyst used is porous Raney nickel, and under these conditions 
Brahme and Doraiswamy, IEC/PDD, 15,130 (1976) report that the reaction 
proceeds as follows: 
solid 
H2(g + 1) + glucose, C~HI~O,(~) 
c;d;llg;t sorbitol, C6H1406(1) 
(A) 
(B) 
with 
Data: 
Gas stream: 
u, = 0.2 m3/s, HA = 277 600 Pa. m3/mol 
Liquid stream: v, = 0.01 m3/s, C, = 2000 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
V, = 2 m3, f, = 0.056 
Catalyst: 
dp = 10 pm, ps = 8900 kg/m3, gk = 2 X 
m3/m cat.s 
Kinetics: 
(kA,ai),+, = 0.05 s-', 
kAc = 
rnls 
22.4. Multistage bubble column hydrogenation. In the previous problem, conver- 
sion to sorbitol is not as high as desired so let us consider an alternative 
design, one which uses an upflow of gas and liquid through a long, narrow 
multistage column 0.25 m2 in cross section and 8 m high containing sus- 
pended solids (d, = 
m and f, = 0.4). What will be the conversion with 
this arrangement? 
Data: (k,,~,),,~ = 0.025 s-', 
k, 
= 
m/s 
All other values are unchanged from the previous problem. 
22.5. Three-phase fluidized bed hydrogenation. Aniline is to be hydrogenated 
in a three-phase fluidized bed of porous clay particles impregnated with 
nickel catalyst. The well-agitated batch of liquid is kept at 130°C by heat 
exchanger tubes passing through the fluidized bed, and by bubbling hydro- 


=== PDF PAGE 534 ===
518 
Chapter 22 G/L Reactions o n  Solid Catalysts 
gen vigorously and at a high rate through the bed at 1 atm. According to 
Govindarao and Murthy, J. Appl. Chem. Biotechnol. 25, 196 (19751, at 
these conditions reaction proceeds as follows: 
Ni 
3H2(g -1) 
f 2 C&5NH2(1) ..t.ly;t C6HllNHC&5 + NH; 
- - - - - - - 
- - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
cyclohexyl-aniline 
with rate 
-rL = krCA, 
k' = 0.05 m3/kg cat. s 
Find the time needed for 90% conversion of this batch of aniline. 
Data: 
Gas stream: 
pure H2 at 1 atm, HA = 28 500 Pa. m3/mol 
Batch of liquid: C, = 1097 mol/m3 
Reactor: 
f, = 0.10, 
= 0.65, f, = 0.25 
Catalyst: 
d, = 300 pm, 
p, = 750 kg/m3 
Be = 8.35 X 10-lo m3/m cat as 
Kinetics: 
(kA,ai),+, = 0.04 s-l, 
k, 
= 
m/s 
Assume that the fraction of NH, in the gas stream is very small at any time. 
22.6. Bubble column hydrogenation. Consider a different design to effect the 
hydrogenation of the previous problem, one which uses a long, narrow 
bubble column of semisuspended 3-mm catalyst particles (f, = 0.4, f, = 
0.5, fg = 0.1). The batch of liquid aniline is circulated through an external 
heat exchanger (volume of liquid in the loop outside the reactor equals 
the total volume of the reactor), and hydrogen is bubbled through the 
column. Find the time needed for 90% conversion of aniline in this unit. 
All other values not mentioned here remain unchanged from the previ- 
ous problem. 
22.7. Trickle bed gas absorber-reactor. Sulfur dioxide is to be removed from a 
gas by passing the gas and water through a bed of highly porous activated 
carbon kept at 25°C. In this system sulfur dioxide and oxygen dissolve in 
water and react on the solid to give sulfur trioxide, as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 535 ===
Problems 519 
where 
Find the fraction of sulfur dioxide removed from a gas stream under the 
following conditions: 
Gas stream: 
v, = 0.01 m3/s, n = 101 325 Pa 
entering SO, = 0.2%, H = 380 000 Pa. m3/mol 
entering 0, = 21%, H = 87 000 Pa. m3/mol 
Liquid stream: 
vl = 2 X 
m3/s 
Reactor: 
2 m high, 
0.1 m2 cross section, f, = 0.6 
Catalyst: 
d, = 5 mm, 
p, = 850 kg/m3 
CBe = 5.35 x 10-lo m3/m s - s 
Kinetics: 
(kiai),+, 
= 0.01 s-', 
kc = 
m/s 
22.8. Hydrogenation in a slurry reactor. The batch hydrogenation of Example 
22.2 takes just about an hour to run. Let us suppose that in practical 
operations we can run eight batches of fluid per day in this unit. Thus, in 
the long run a batch of fluid is processed every three hours. 
Another way of running this reaction is to feed the agitated reactor 
continuously at such a rate that we get 90% conversion of butynediol. How 
do these two processing rates compare in the long term? Give your answer 
as FBO,COntinUOUS/FBO, 
batch. Assume that the liquid feed composition, gas compo- 
sition and pressure, mass transfer and chemical rates are the same in both 
batch and continuous operations. 


=== PDF PAGE 536 ===


=== PDF PAGE 537 ===
Part IV 
Non-Catalytic Systems 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 1523 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Design 1540 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 1566 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Design I589 


=== PDF PAGE 538 ===


=== PDF PAGE 539 ===
Chapter 23 
Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Heterogeneous fluid-fluid reactions are made to take place for one of three 
reasons. First, the product of reaction may be a desired material. Such reactions 
are numerous and can be found in practically all areas of the chemical industry 
where organic syntheses are employed. An example of liquid-liquid reactions is 
the nitration of organics with a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids to form 
materials such as nitroglycerin. The chlorination of liquid benzene and other 
hydrocarbons with gaseous chlorine is an example of gas-liquid reactions. In the 
inorganic field we have the manufacture of sodium amide, a solid, from gaseous 
ammonia and liquid sodium: 
Fluid-fluid reactions may also be made to take place to facilitate the removal 
of an unwanted component from a fluid. Thus, the absorption of a solute gas by 
water may be accelerated by adding a suitable material to the water which will 
react with the solute being absorbed. Table 23.1 shows the reagents used for 
various solute gases. 
The third reason for using fluid-fluid systems is to obtain a vastly improved 
product distribution for homogeneous multiple reactions than is possible by using 
the single phase alone. Let us turn to the first two reasons, both of which concern 
the reaction of materials originally present in different phases. 
The following factors will determine how we approach this process. 
The Overall Rate Expression. Since materials in the two separate phases must 
contact each other before reaction can occur, both the mass transfer and the 
chemical rates will enter the overall rate expression. 
Equilibrium Solubility. The solubility of the reacting components will limit 
their movement from phase to phase. This factor will certainly influence the 
form of the rate equation since it will determine whether the reaction takes place 
in one or both phases. 
The Contacting Scheme. In gas-liquid systems semibatch and countercurrent 
contacting schemes predominate. In liquid-liquid systems mixed flow (mixer- 
523 


=== PDF PAGE 540 ===
524 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Table 23.1 Absorption Systems with 
Chemical Reactionu 
Solute Gas 
Reagent 
co2 
co2 
co2 
CO 
co 
SO2 
SO2 
SO2 
SO2 
c12 
c12 
H2S 
H2S 
SO3 
C2H4 
C2H4 
Olefins 
NO 
NO 
NO 
Carbonates 
Hydroxides 
Ethanolamines 
Cuprous amine complexes 
Cuprous ammonium chloride 
Ca(OH12 
Ozone-H20 
HCr04 
KOH 
Hz0 
FeC1, 
Ethanolamines 
Fe(OH13 
KOH 
Trialkyl phosphates 
Cuprous ammonium complexes 
FeSO, 
Ca(OH12 
H2SO4 
" Adapted from Teller (1960). 
settlers) and batch contacting are used in addition to counter and concurrent con- 
tacting. 
Many possible permutations of rate, equilibrium, and contacting pattern can 
be imagined; however, only some of these are important in the sense that they 
are widely used on the technical scale. 
23.1 THE RATE EQUATION 
For convenience in notation let use talk of GIL reactions, even though what we 
say holds equally for LIL reactions. Further, let us assume that gaseous A is 
soluble in the liquid but that B does not enter the gas. Thus A must enter 
and move into the liquid phase before it can react, and reaction occurs in this 
phase alone. 
Now the overall rate expression for the reaction will have to account for the 
mass transfer resistance (to bring reactants together) and the resistance of the 
chemical reactions step. Since the relative magnitude of these resistances can 
vary greatly we have a whole spectrum of possibilities to consider. 


=== PDF PAGE 541 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 525 
Our analysis considers the following second-order reaction 
;\(g-I) 
+ b?(l) - R(s or lor g), 
-r, = kCACB 
4 
\present in gas, but 
'present in liquid 'reaction occurs in liquid only, 
soluble in liquid with 
and unable to 
maybe close to the interface 
solubility given by 
enter the gas 
(in the liquid film), maybe 
PA, = HACA~ 
phase 
in the main body of liquid 
For notation consider a unit volume of contactor Vr with its gas, liquid, and solid 
,- 
G L in contact 
in this volume 
V, = volume of 
Solid may be 
present 
liquid 
The rate of reaction is usefully written in a number of ways, as follows: 
These rates are related by 


=== PDF PAGE 542 ===
526 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Since reactant A must move from gas to liquid for reaction to occur, diffusional 
resistances enter the rate. Here we will develop everything in terms of the two- 
film theory. Other theories can and have been used; however, they give essentially 
the same result, but with more impressive mathematics. 
The Rate Equation for Straight Mass Transfer (Absorption) of A 
Here we have two resistances in series, of the gas film and of the liquid film. 
Thus, as shown in Fig. 23.1, the rate of transfer of A from gas to liquid is given 
by the rate expressions, for the gas film 
m o l  
m3 contactor. P a .  s 
and for the liquid film 
nj liquid 
( 
rn31iauid 
C 
\ - --- ---L- - - ~  
m2 surface . s 
Gas side 
Liquid side 
r Interface 
Assume equilibrium at interface, or 
pAi = H ~ i  
C ~ i  
and take HAi = constant, thus 
Figure 23.1 Setting up the rate equation for straight mass transfer based 
on the two film theory. 


=== PDF PAGE 543 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 527 
,- 
Interface 
Reaction can take place in both the 
liquid film and in the main body of 
liquid. Fast reactions occur in a 
narrow zone within the film, slow 
reactions spread through the film 
and main body of liquid. 
7 
" 
7 
Gas 
Liquid 
Main body 
film 
film 
ofliquid 
Figure 23.2 Setting up the rate equation for absorption of A in the liquid, 
and reaction in the liquid, based on the two-film theory. 
Combining Eqs. 2 and 3 with Henry's law pAi = HACAi to eliminate the unknown 
interface conditions pAi and CAi we obtain the final rate expression for straight 
mass transfer at any point in the absorber. 
+- 
Pa . m3 liquid 
mol 
The Rate Equation for Mass Transfer and Reaction 
Here we have three factors to consider: what happens in the gas film; in the 
liquid film; and in the main body of the liquid, as shown in Fig. 23.2. 
All sorts of special forms of the rate equation can result depending on the 
relative values of the rate constants k, kg, and k,, the concentration ratio of 
reactants pAICB, and Henry's law constant HA. It turns out that there are eight 
cases to consider, going from the extreme of infinitely fast reaction rate (mass 
transfer control) to the other extreme of very slow reaction rate (no mass transfer 
resistance need be considered). 
The eight special cases, each with its particular rate equation, are, from infi- 
nitely fast to very slow reaction, as follows: 
Case A: 
Instantaneous reaction with low C, 
Case B: 
Instantaneous reaction with high CB 
Case C: 
Fast reaction in liquid film, with low CB 
Case D: 
Fast reaction in liquid film, with high C, 


=== PDF PAGE 544 ===
528 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
I 
PA 
In film and 
main body 
0 
C A  
A 
c 
0 
.- * 
m 
E' 
.w 
m 
+ 
X - 
E 
E' 
+ 
W 
Phase 
interface\ 
PA 
I 
PA 
G9 
I 
@ 
Reaction only 
in film 
Reaction 
PA 
Reaction only 
in main body 
of liquid 
.. .. 
v 
- 
Gas 
Liquid 
Figure 23.3 Interface behavior for the liquid-phase reaction 
A (from gas) + bB (liquid) +products (liquid) 
for the complete range of rates of the reaction and of the mass transfer. 
Case E and F: Intermediate rate with reaction in the film and in the main body 
of the liquid 
Case G: 
Slow reaction in main body but with film resistance 
Case W: 
Slow reaction, no mass transfer resistance 
We show these eight cases in Fig. 23.3. 


=== PDF PAGE 545 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 529 
We discuss these special cases and present their particular rate equations later, 
after we present the general rate equation. 
+AN' = 
------ 
----- 
gas film 
liquid film 
liquid bulk 
resistance resistance 
resistance 
The absorption of A from gas is larger when reaction occurs within the liquid 
film than for straight mass transfer. Thus for the same concentrations at the two 
boundaries of the liquid film we have 
rate of take up of A 
Liquid film 
when reaction occurs 
rate of take up of A for same c, 
c ~ ,  c~ 
(6) 
in the two cases 
\ straight mass transfer / 
The value of E is always greater or equal to one. The only problem now is to 
evaluate E, the enhancement factor. Figure 23.4 shows that E is dependent on 
two quantities: 
the enhancement factor for 
an infinitely fast reaction 
(7) 
maximum possible conversion in the 
film compared with maximum transport 
(8) 
through the film 
M, stands for the Hatta modulus, in recognition of the scientist who first dealt 
with this problem, Hatta (1932). 
Let us now examine the eight special cases. 
Case A: Instantaneous Reaction with Respect to Mass Transfer. Since an ele- 
ment of liquid can contain either A or B, but not both, reaction will occur at a 
plane between A-containing and B-containing liquid. Also, since reactants must 
diffuse to this reaction plane the rate of diffusion of A and B will determine the 
rate, so that a change in p, or C, will move the plane one way or the other (see 
Fig. 23.5). At steady state the flow rate of B toward the reaction zone will be b 


=== PDF PAGE 546 ===
530 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
If Ei > 5 M, we then have 
pseudo first order reaction by 
the G/L interface in which case 
E = M H  
More precisely 
All reaction occurs 
'ie,tc, 
If Ei < MX then we have 
M,=- 
~ A I  
5 
instantaneous reaction at a plane 
on the L film in which case 
E " Ei 
More precisely: 
E~~ ( E ~ -  1 ) 
E r Ei- --- + ... 
M,: 
Figure 23.4 The enhancement factor for fluid-fluid reactions as a function of MH and Ei, 
modified from the numerical solution of van Krevelens and Hoftijzer (1954). 
times the flow rate of A toward the reaction zone. Thus, 
---------- ----------- ------------- 
A in gas film 
A in liquid film 
B in liquid film 
where k,, and k,,, k,, are the mass transfer coefficients in gas and liquid phases. 
The liquid side coefficients are for straight mass transfer without chemical reac- 
tion and are therefore based on flow through the whole film of thickness x,. 
At the interface the relationship betweenp, and C, is given by the distribution 
coefficient, called Henry's law constant for gas-liquid systems. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 547 ===
23.1 The Rate Equation 531 
is at the interfa 
PA 
Case A 
Eq. 13 
Case B 
Eq. 16 
Figure 23.5 Concentration of reactants as visualized by the two-film theory for an infinitely 
fast irreversible reactions of any order, A + bB4products. Case A-low 
C,, Case B- 
high C, (see Eq. 17). 
In addition, since the movement of material within the film is visualized to occur 
by diffusion alone, the transfer coefficients for A and B are related by1 
Eliminating the unmeasured intermediates x, x,, p,,, CAi by Eqs. 9, 10, and 12, 
we obtain 
for Case A: 
( k  A ~ P A  > y) 
For the special case of negligible gas-phase resistance, for example, if you used 
pure reactant A in the gas phase, then p, = pAi or kg + w, in which case Eq. 
Alternatives to the film theory are also in use. These models [Higbie (1935); Danckwerts (1950, 
1955)l view that the liquid at the interface is continually washed away and replaced by fresh fluid 
from the main body of the liquid, and that this is the means of mass transport. These unsteady-state 
surface renewal theories all predict 
as opposed to Eq. 12, for the film theory. 
With the exception of this one difference, these models, so completely different from a physical 
standpoint, give essentially identical predictions of steady-state behavior. Because of this, and because 
the film theory is so much easier to develop and use than the other theories, we deal with it exclusively. 


=== PDF PAGE 548 ===
532 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
13 reduces to 
Case B: Instantaneous Reaction; High CB. Returning to the general situation 
shown in Fig. 23.5, if the concentration of B is raised, or more precisely, if 
then this condition, combined with Eq. 5, requires that the reaction zone move 
to and stay at the interface rather than remain in the liquid film. This is shown 
in Fig. 23.5. When this happens, the resistance of the gas-phase controls, and 
the rate is not affected by any further increase in concentration of B. In addition, 
Eq. 9 simplifies to 
for Case B: 
kBCB 
(kAgpA " 4) 
(16) 
Equation 17 tells whether Case A or Case B applies in any situation. Thus, 
Let us now look at the other cases. 
Case C: Fast Reaction; Low CW The plane of reaction for case A now spreads 
into a zone of reaction in which A and B are both present. However, reaction 
is fast enough so that this reaction zone remains totally within the liquid film. 
Thus, no A enters the main body of liquid to react there. 
Since the last resistance term in the general rate equation, Eq. 5, is negligible 
(large k), the rate form for this case is 
Case D: Fast Reaction; High CB, Hence Pseudo First-Order Rate with Respect 
to A. For the special case where CB does not drop appreciably within the film, 
it can be taken to be constant throughout, and the second-order reaction rate 
(Case C) simplifies to the more easily solved first-order rate expression. Thus, 


=== PDF PAGE 549 ===
23.1 The Rate Equation 533 
Case C 
Case D 
(fast second order) 
(pseudo-first order) 
Eq. 18 
Eq. 19 
Figure 23.6 Location of reaction in the liquid film for a fast (but not infinitely fast) second- 
order reaction. Case C-low 
C,, Case D-high 
C,. 
the general rate expression, Eq. 5, reduces to 
Figure 23.6 sketches Cases C and D. 
Cases E and F: Intermediate Rate with Respect to Mass Transfer. Here reaction 
is slow enough for some A to diffuse through the film into the main body of the 
fluid. Consequently, A reacts both within the film and in the main body of the 
fluid. Here we have to use the general rate expression with its three resistances, 
Eq. 5. 
Case G: Slow Reaction with Respect to Mass Transfer. This represents the 
somewhat curious case where all reaction occurs in the main body of the liquid; 
however, the film still provides a resistance to the transfer of A into the main 
body of liquid. Thus, three resistances enter into the rate expression, and Eq. 5 
reduces to 
Case li: Infinitely Slow Reaction. Here the mass transfer resistance is negligible, 
the compositions of A and B are uniform in the liquid, and the rate is determined 
by chemical kinetics alone. 
Figure 23.7 shows cases G and H. 


=== PDF PAGE 550 ===
534 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
Case G 
Eq. 20 
G film 
L film 
L main body 
m- * 
Case H 
Eq. 21 
Figure 23.7 Slow reactions Case G still shows film resistance. Case H shows no film resis- 
tance. 
Review of the Role of the Hatta Number, MH 
To tell whether reaction is fast or slow, we focus on unit surface of gas-liquid 
interface, we assume that gas-phase resistance is negligible, and we define a film 
conversion parameter 
2 - 
maximum possible conversion in the film 
M H  - maximum diffusional transport through the film 
(22) 
If MH 9 1, all reaction occurs in the film, and surface area is the controlling rate 
factor. On the other hand, if M, G 1 no reaction occurs in the film, and bulk 
volume becomes the controlling rate factor. More precisely, it has been found 
that: 
1. If MH > 2, reaction occurs in the film and we have Cases A, B, C, D. 
2. If 0.02 < MH < 2, we then have the intermediate Cases E, F, G. 
3. If MH < 0.02, we have the infinitely slow reaction of Case H. 
When MH is large, we should pick a contacting device which develops or 
creates large interfacial areas; energy for agitation is usually an important consid- 
eration in these contacting schemes. On the other hand, if MH is very small, all 
we need is a large volume of liquid. Agitation to create large interfacial areas 
is of no benefit here. 
Table 24.1 of the next chapter presents typical data for various contacting 
devices, and from this we see that spray or plate columns should be efficient 
devices for systems with fast reaction (or large MH), while bubble contactors 
should be more efficient for slow reactions (or small MH). 
Clues to the Kinetic Regime from Solubility Data 
For reactions which occur in the film, the phase distribution coefficient H can 
suggest whether the gas-phase resistance is likely to be important or not. To 


=== PDF PAGE 551 ===
23.1 
The Rate Equation 535 
show this we write the expression for straight mass transfer of A across the gas 
and liquid films 
(gas film 
liquid film 
Now for slightly soluble gases HA is large; hence, with all other factors unchanged 
the above rate equation shows that the liquid film resistance term is large. The 
reverse holds for highly soluble gases. Thus, we see that: 
Gas film resistance controls for highly soluble gases. 
Liquid film resistance controls for slightly soluble gases. 
Table 23.2 Typical Values of HA = pAiICAi, Pa . m3/mol, for Common Gases in 
Water 
slightly soluble gas 4 
-highly soluble gas 
Note that gases are more soluble at lower temperatures. Additional values for 
many different gases can be extracted, with difficulty, from Perry and Green 
(1984) and from references given by Danckwerts (1970). 
Since a highly soluble gas is easy to absorb and has its main resistance in the 
gas phase, we would not need to add a liquid-phase reactant B to promote the 
absorption. On the other hand, a sparingly soluble gas is both difficult to absorb 
and has its main resistance in the liquid phase; hence it is this system which 
would benefit greatly by a reaction in the liquid phase. 
Final Comments 
To find the size of process unit needed for a given job (this is discussed in the 
next chapter), we need to know the overall rate of reaction. This chapter explains 
how to evaluate the overall rate of reaction. 
Many sources report on the physical and chemical constants used in this 
chapter. I recommend the following ones: 
Doraiswamy and Sharma (1984): an extensive treatment of this whole subject 
Shah (1979): evaluation of the mass transfer coefficients in various types of 
equipment. Also experimental devices for finding these coefficients. 
Danckwerts (1970): easy to follow discussion, sources for Henry's law con- 
stants, equations to use for finding mass transfer coefficients. 


=== PDF PAGE 552 ===
536 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
FINDING THE RATE OF A G/L REACTION 
Air with gaseous A bubbles through a tank containing aqueous B. Reaction 
occurs as follows: 
For this system 
k A p  = 0.01 mol/hr - m3. Pa 
fi = 0.98 
kAp = 20 hr-l 
HA = 105 Pa. m3/mol, very low solubility 
g',, = CBB, = 
m2/hr 
a = 20 m2/m3 
I 
For a point in the absorber-reactor where 
I 
pA = 5 X lo3 Pa and CB = 100 mol/m3 
(a) locate the resistance to reaction (what % is in the gas film, in the liquid 
film, in the main body of liquid) 
(b) locate the reaction zone 
(c) determine the behavior in the liquid film (whether pseudo first-order reac- 
tion, instantaneous, physical transport, etc.) 
(d) calculate the rate of reaction (mol/m3 hr) 
I SOLUTION 
This chapter has only analyzed second-order reactions, however, this problem 
deals with a third-order reaction. Since no analysis is available for other than 
second-order reactions, let us replace our third-order reaction with a second- 
order approximation. Thus, 
To find the rate from the general expression (Eq. 5), we need to first evaluate 
E, and M,. 
Let us do this: 
~ B C B H A  
= 
+ 100 x lo5 
(Ei)first guess = + 
= lo3 
bgd~i 2(5 x 10') 
1( 
Since (Ei)firstguess 
> 5 MH, then for any other smaller guess for pAi we will still 
have E, > 5 M,. 
Therefore, from Fig. 23.4 we have pseudo first-order reaction 


=== PDF PAGE 553 ===
Problems 537 
in the film with 
E = MH = 100 
Now to the rate expression, Eq. 5, 
NII 
-rA = 
PA 
HA 
HA 
1 + + -  
k ~ , a   APE 
kc;fl 
- 
- 
5 x 103 
= 33 mollhr . m3 reactor 
lo5 
+ 
1.- 
lo5 
tol 20$100) 
(lo6) (loo2) (.098) 
I 
Thus, 
I 
(a) 213 of the resistance is in the gas film, 113 is in the liquid film +-- 
(b) the reaction zone is in the liquid film + 
I 
(c) reaction proceeds by a pseudd first-order reaction of A, at the interface + 
(d) the rate Is - r r  = 33 mollhr -m3 
+- 
REFERENCES 
Danckwerts, P. V., Trans. Faraday Soc., 46, 300 (1950). 
, 
AIChE J., 1, 456 (1955). 
, 
Gas-Liquid Reactions, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970. 
Doraiswamy, L. K., and Sharma, M. M., Heterogeneous Reactions, Vol. 2, John Wiley 
and Sons, New York, 1984. 
Hatta, S., Technological Reports, TBhoku University, 10, 119 (1932); from Sherwood, 
T. K., and Pigford, R. L., Absorption and Extraction, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1952. 
Higbie, R., Trans. A.Z.Ch.E., 31, 365 (1935). 
Perry, R. H., and Green, D. W., Chemical Engineers' Handbook, 6th ed., Section 3, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1984. 
Shah, Y. T., Gas-Liquid-Solid Reactor Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1979. 
Teller, A. J., Chem. Eng., 67, 111 (July 11, 1960). 
van Krevelens, D. W., and Hoftijzer, P. J., Rec. Trau. Chim., 67, 563 (1948); Trans. I. 
Chem. E., 32, 5360 (1954). 
PROBLEMS 
Gaseous A absorbs and reacts with B in liquid according to 


=== PDF PAGE 554 ===
538 
Chapter 23 Fluid-Fluid Reactions: Kinetics 
in a packed bed under conditions where 
k A p  = 0.1 mollhr . m2 of reactor. Pa 
fi = 0.01 m3 liquid/m3 reactor 
kAla = 100 m3 liquid/m3 reactor. hr 
gAl = gBl 
= 
m2/hr 
a = 100 m2/m3 reactor 
At a point in the reactor where pA = 100 Pa and CB = 100 mol/m3 liquid 
(a) calculate the rate of reaction in mol/hr . m3 of reactor. 
(b) describe the following characteristics of the kinetics: 
location of the major resistance (gas film, liquid film, main body 
of liquid) 
behavior in the liquid film (pseudo first-order reaction, instantaneous, 
second-order reaction, physical transport) 
for the following values of reaction rate and Henry's law constant. 
k, m3 liquidlmol . hr 
HA, Pa. m3 liquidlmol 
23.1. 
10 
lo5 
23.2. 
lo6 
lo4 
23.3. 
10 
lo3 
23.4. 
lo-4 
1 
23.5. 
lo-z 
1 
23.6. 
lo8 
1 
23.7. Redo Example 23.1 with just one change. Let us suppose that C, is very 
low, or C, = 1. 
23.8. At high pressure CO, is absorbed into a solution of NaOH in a packed 
column. The reaction is as follows: 
CO, + 2NaOH -+Na2C03 + H20 with -rA, = kCACB 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
Find the rate of absorption, the controlling resistance, and what is happen- 
ing in the liquid film, at a point in the column where pA = lo5 Pa and 
C, = 500 mol/m3. 
Data: kAga = 
mol/m2. s . Pa 
HA = 25 000 Pa. m3/mol 
This problem was adapted from Danckwerts (1970). 


=== PDF PAGE 555 ===
Problems 539 
23.9. Hydrogen sulfide is absorbed by a solution of methanolamine (MEA) in 
a packed column. At the top of the column, gas is at 20 atm and it contains 
0.1% of H,S, while the absorbent contains 250 mol/m3 of free MEA. The 
diffusivity of MEA in solution is 0.64 times that of H2S. The reaction is 
normally regarded as irreversible and instantaneous. 
H,S + RNH, -+ HS- + RNH; 
- - - - - - - - - 
(A) 
(B) 
For the flow rates and packing used 
k~ 
= 60 mol/m3 - s atm 
HA = 1 x 
m3 - atmlmol, Henry's law constant for H2S in water. 
(a) Find the rate of absorption of H,S in MEA solution. 
(b) To find out whether it is worthwhile using MEA absorbent, determine 
how much faster is absorption with MEA compared to absorption in 
pure water. 
This problem was adapted from Danckwerts (1970). 


=== PDF PAGE 556 ===
Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
We must first choose the right kind of contactor, then find the size needed. There 
are two kinds of contactor-towers and tanks, and Fig. 24.1 shows some examples. 
As may be expected, these contactors have widely different GIL volume ratios, 
interfacial areas, kg and k,, and concentration driving forces. The particular 
properties of the system you are dealing with, the solubility of gaseous reactant, 
the concentration of reactants, etc.-in 
effect the location of the main resistance 
in the rate equation-will 
suggest that you use one class of contactor and not 
the other. 
Table 24.1 shows some of the characteristics of these contactors. 
Factors to Consider in Selecting a Contactor 
(a) Contacting pattern. We idealize these as shown in Fig. 24.2. 
Towers approximate plug Glplug L. 
Bubble tanks approximate plug Glmixed L. 
Agitated tanks approximate mixed Glmixed L. 
As we shall see, towers have the largest mass transfer driving force and 
in this respect have an advantage over tanks. Agitated tanks have the 
smallest driving force. 
(b) kg and k,. For liquid droplets in gas kg is high, k, is low. For gas bubbles 
rising in liquid kg is low, k, is high. 
(c) Flow rates. Packed beds work best with relative flow rates of about F,IF, 7 
10 at 1 bar. Other contactors are more flexible in that they work well in 
a wider range of F,IFg values. 
(d) If the resistance is in the gas andlor liquid films you want a large interfacial 
area "a," thus most agitated contactors and most columns. If the L film 
dominates, stay away from spray contactors. If the G film dominates stay 
away from bubble contactors. 
(e) If the resistance is in the main body of the L you want large f, = V,/V,. 
Stay away from towers. Use tank contactors. 
(f) Solubility. For very soluble gases, those with a small value of Henry's law 
constant H (ammonia, for example), gas film controls, thus you should 


=== PDF PAGE 557 ===
Selection 541 
Irrigated 
Staged bubble 
Spray tower 
packed bed 
Plate tower 
tower 
Can have perforated plates, 
Static mixer 
and pulsing action 
Bubble tank 
Agitated tank 
G 
L 
\ 
Ether with or / 
without flow of L 
Figure 24.1 Tower and tank contactors for GIL reactions. 
avoid bubble contactors. For gases of low solubility in the liquid, thus high 
H value (O,, N,, as examples) liquid film controls, so avoid spray towers. 
(g) Reaction lowers the resistance of the liquid film, so 
For absorption of highly soluble gases, chemical reaction is not helpful. 
For absorption of slightly soluble gases, chemical reaction is helpful and 
does speed up the rate. 
Nomenclature. We use the following symbols in our development. 
A, = cross-sectional area of column. 
a = interfacial contact area per unit volume of reactor (m2/m3). 
f, = volume fraction of liquid (-). 
i = any participant, reactant or product, in the reaction. 
A, B, R, S = participants in the reaction. 
U = carrier or inert component in a phase, hence neither reactant 
nor product. 
T = total moles in the reacting (or liquid) phase. 
Y, = pAlpU, moles Almole inert in the gas (-). 
X, = CA/Cu, moles Almole inert in the liquid (-). 
Fi, F; = molar flow rate of ail the gas and the liquid (molls). 
F, = Fip,l~, upward molar flow rate of inerts in the gas (molls). 


=== PDF PAGE 558 ===


=== PDF PAGE 559 ===
24.1 Straight Mass Transfer 543 
Steady 
--- 
state 
operations 
Plug Glplug L 
Plug Glplug L 
Plug Glmixed L 
Mixed Glmixed L 
Batch 
Unsteady-state operations 
of L 
(semibatch) where the liquid 
composition changes with time 
Mixed Glbatch uniform L 
Plug Glbatch uniform L 
Figure 24.2 Contacting patterns for GIL contactors. 
F, = F ;  C,ICT, downward molar flow rate of inerts in the liquid phase 
(molls). 
With this nomenclature, we have the following relationships among the various 
concentration measures. 
The performance equations which are written in terms of F, and Fl are useful 
when the flowing streams have inert carrier material. The equation written in 
terms of FB and F ;  are useful when the flowing streams only contain reactive 
materials and no inerts. 
24.1 STRAIGHT MASS TRANSFER 
Since the approach for reacting systems is a straightforward extension of straight 
mass transfer, let us first develop equations for absorption alone of A by liquid 
A (gas) + A (liquid) 


=== PDF PAGE 560 ===
544 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
then go to reacting systems. 
Note the similarity in the performance equations. 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Countercurrent 
Flow in a Tower 
To develop the performance equation, we combine the rate equation with the 
material balance. Thus for steady-state countercurrent operations we have for 
a differential element of volume 
(A lost by gas) = (A gained by liquid) = (-rr)dV, 
Integrating for the whole tower gives 
In brief, the design procedure is summarized in Fig. 24.3. For dilute systems 
CA < C, and pA G n, so Fb = F, and F ;  = F,. In this situation the differential 
material balance becomes 
and for any two points in the absorber 


=== PDF PAGE 561 ===
24.1 Straight Mass Transfer 545 
+ 
Gas -& 
Liquid --f 
Interface at any point 
High CA 
in tower 
The operating line is slightly curved here. 
The shaded area 
1 
Y A 
Figure 24.3 Illustration of the design procedure for straight mass transfer in countercur- 
rent towers. 
The rate expression reduces to 
= K A , ~ ( P A  
- ~ 2 )  
= K
A
~
C
~
 
- CAI 
Thus the general integrated rate expression of Eq. 2 becomes, with Eq. 3, 
coefficient on gas 
with gas PA, or 
1 - 1  HA 
---+- 
p i  = HACA 
-- 
1 
1 
1 
+ - CL=pAIHA 
-- 
K
~
g
 
k
~
g
 k
~
l
 
K
~
l
 
k
~
l
 


=== PDF PAGE 562 ===
546 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
For the other contacting patterns of Fig. 24.2 plug Glplug L cocurrent, mixed 
Glmixed L, plug Glmixed L, mixed Glplug L, mixed Glbatch L see Levenspiel 
(1996) Chapter 42, or recall the equations and methods from your lessons in 
mass transfer and unit operations. 
24.2 
MASS TRANSFER PLUS NOT VERY SLOW REACTION 
Here we only treat the reaction A (g -+ 1) + bB(1) -+ products (1). We assume 
that the rate is fast enough so that no unreacted A enters the main body of the 
liquid. This assumes that the Hatta modulus is not very much smaller than unity. 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in a Countercurrent 
Tower 
For a differential slice of absorber-reactor we write 
(A lost) = ( B lost ) = ( disappearance 
by gas 
b by liquid 
of A by reaction 
----- 
- - - - - - - 
I11 
------------ 
I 
I1 
For Dilute Systems. p, = n and C, = C, in which case the above expressions 
simplify to 


=== PDF PAGE 563 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 547 
Rearranging and integrating I and 11, I1 and 111, I and I11 gives the following: 
In general 
- 
-- 
Fi 
... with 
Fg(Y~2- Y ~ l )  
= - (XBl - xB2) 
b 
For dilute systems 
from point 1 to and point i in the tower 
d C ~  ... with 
F 
g ( ~ & ? - ~ A l )  
'IT 
= F I ( c ~ ~ -  'B1) 
b CT 
To Solve for Vr 
pick a fewp, values, usually pAl ,p,, and one intermediate value are enough, 
and for each p, find the corresponding CB. 
evaluate the rate for each point from 
integrate the performance equation graphically 
Plug Flow GIPlug Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in a Cocurrent Tower 
Here simply change Fl to -Fl (for upflow of both streams) or F, to -F, (for 
downflow of both streams) in the equations for countercurrent flow. Be sure to 
find the proper C, value for eachp,. The rest of the procedure remains the same. 


=== PDF PAGE 564 ===
548 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Mixed Flow GIMixed Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in an Agitated 
Tank Contactor 
Since the composition is the same everywhere in the vessel make an accounting 
about the vessel as a whole. Thus, 
disappearance of 
A by reaction 
Whole vessel is well 
I 
mixed and at exit 
G 
P A I ~  
conditions 
In symbols these equalities become 
4 
Fg(YAin - Y ~ o u t )  = - (X 
b 
Bin - X ~ o u t )  = (-'?)/at 
exit conditions 
for both G and L 
and for dilute systems 
F 
Ain 
Aout 
F l  
(P - P 
) = - 
(CBin - CBout) = (-'?)]at 
exit Vr 
bC, 
Tojind V, the solution is direct; evaluate -rT from known stream compositions 
and solve Eq. 11 or 12. 
To jind C,,,, and p,,, given Vr guess pAout 
, evaluate CBout, 
then -rT, then Vr . 
Compare the calculated Vr value with the true value. If different, guess an- 
other PAOUt . 
Plug Flow GIMixed Flow L-Mass 
Transfer + Reaction in Bubble 
Tank Contactors 
Here we must make two accountings, a differential balance for the loss of A 
from the gas because G is in plug flow, and an overall balance for B because L 
is in mixed flow. 
Focusing on a bit of rising gas, we have 
(ti::) 
= ( 
disappearance of 
... or... FgdYA=(-rT)ILatexit 
dVr 
(13) 
A by reaction 
conditions 


=== PDF PAGE 565 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 549 
All liquid 
Fg I pAin 
is at cBOut 
For the liquid as a whole and for the gas as a whole, a balance about the whole 
reactor gives 
Integrating Eq. 13 along the path of the bubble and also using Eq. 14 gives 
In general 
... with ... 
Fg(YAi,- YAou;) = 
( X ~ i n  - X ~ ~ u t )  
for liquid at C
B
~
~
~
 
For dilute systems 
F 
... with ... 
g ( ~ A i n - p A o u t )  
= a ( c B i . -  
CB0.t) 
~ C T  
If Vr is to be found and the exit conditions are known, then the procedure is 
direct. Pick a number of p, values and integrate graphically. 
If p,,,, 
and CBou, are to be found in a reactor of known volume Vr then we - 
require a trial and error solution. Simply guess C,,,, 
and then see if Vc,,c,,,,,d - 
v,,,, . 
Mixed Flow GIBatch Uniform L-Absorption + Reaction in a Batch Agitated 
Tank Contactor 
Since this is not a steady-state operation, composition and rates all change with 
time, as shown in Fig. 24.4. At any instant the material balance equates the three 


=== PDF PAGE 566 ===
550 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
V, volume of L - 
V, volume of . 
G/L emulsion 
Rises with time as B is consumed 
At any instant CB is the same 
everywhere in the tank. However 
CB decreases with time because 
of reaction with A. 
At the start CB = CBO 
At the end CB = C B ~  
f 
Constant -/ 
Figure 24.4 History of a batch of reacting liquid. 
quantities shown below and thus in general 
Vl ~ C B  
Fg(YAin - YAoui) 
= 
= (-rr)Vr 
------------- 
b dt 
- - - - - - - - - - - 
I 
I1 
I11 
loss of A from gas 
decrease of 
disappearance of A or B 
B with time by reaction. In the rate 
in L 
expression use p~~~~ since 
G is in mixed flow. 
For dilute systems 
F 
a 
Ain 
Aout 
v, ~ C B  
A (p 
- 
) = 
= (-rr)Vr 
b dt 
To Find the Time Needed for a Given Operation 
Choose a number of CB values, say C,,, CBf and an intermediate CB value. 
For each C, value guess pA0,, . 
Next calculate MH, E,, and then E and -rr. This may require trial and 
error, but not often. 
See if terms I and I11 are equal to each other 
and keep adjusting pAOu, until they do. 
As a shortcut: if pA < a and if E = MH then E is independent of pA in which 
case I and I11 combine to give 


=== PDF PAGE 567 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 551 
Next combine terms I1 and I11 to find the processing time 
h C B O d C ,  
t = - 1  
. . . solve graphically 
b cBf - r r  
This time can be compared with the minimum needed if all A reacts and 
none escapes the vessel. This situation is represented by p,,,, 
= 0 at all 
times. Thus 
1 
1 amount of B reacted 
- (
0
 
- f 
b (away in the vessel 
t-:- = b 
- 
- 
,Lull 
. , 
amount of A entering 
the vessel in unit time 
Combining t and tmin gives the efficiency of utilization of A. Thus 
percent of entering A 
which reacts with B 
Example 24.6 illustrates this procedure for batch absorber-reactors. 
TOWERS FOR STRAIGHT ABSORPTION 
The concentration of undesirable impurity in air (at 1 bar = lo5 Pa) is to be 
reduced from 0.1% (or 100 Pa) to 0.02% (or 20 Pa) by absorption in pure water. 
Find the height of tower required for countercurrent operations. 
Data 
For consistency let us use SI units throughout. 
For the packing 


=== PDF PAGE 568 ===
552 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
The solubility of A in water is given by Henry's law constant 
HA = p,,/C,, 
= 12.5 Pa. m3/mol 
The flow rates per meter squared cross section of tower are 
F,/A, = 1 x 105 mol/hr m2 
F,/A, = 7 X lo5 mollhr . m2 
The molar density of liquid under all conditions is 
C, = 56 000 mol/m3 
Figure E24.1 shows the quantities known at this point. 
point 
tower 
in the 
Figure E24.1 
Our strategy is to first solve the material balance, then determine the tower 
height. Since we are dealing with dilute solutions we may use the simplified form 
of the material balance. So for any point in the tower p, and CA are related by 
Eq. 4. 


=== PDF PAGE 569 ===
24.2 
Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 553 
from which the concentration of A in the liquid leaving the tower is 
The expression for tower height is, from Eq. 6, 
Now evaluate terms 
This expression shows that 
I 
G film resistance = 3.1251128.125 = 0.024, or 2.4% 
L film resistance = 1251128.125 = 0.976, or 97.6% 
and 
(KAga) = 11128.125 = 0.0078 mollhr . m3. Pa 
Next evaluate p, - pz. Thus with Eq. (i) we get 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Inserting Eqs. (iv) and (v) in (iii) gives 
h = 
(1 x lo5 mollhr - m2) 
(lo5 Pa)(0.0078 mollhr . m3. Pa) 
= (128.125) (
2
0
)
-
 
loo - 20 = 512.5 rn 
Comment. Here the tower is very high, unacceptably high. Also note that most 
of the resistance (over 97%) lies in the liquid film, making this a liquid-film- 
controlling process. However, if we added component B to the liquid which 
reacts with A, we should be able to speed things-up. Let's see if this-is so. 


=== PDF PAGE 570 ===
554 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
TOWERS FOR HIGH CONCENTRATION OF LIQUID 
REACTANT 
To the water of Example 24.1 add a high concentration of reactant B, C,, = 
800 mol/m3 or approximately 0.8 N. Material B reacts with A extremely rapidly 
I 
A(g -, 1) + B(1) +product (1), 
k = w 
Assume that the diffusivities of A and B in water are the same, thus 
k,, = k,/ = k, 
Figure E24.2 shows what is known at this point. 
Figure E24.2 
The strategy in solving the problem is as follows 
Step 1. Express the material balance and find CB2 in the exit stream. 
Step 2. Find which of the many forms of rate equation should be used. 
Step 3. Determine the tower height. 
Step 1. Material balance. For dilute solutions with rapid reaction Eq. 6 gives 
for any point in the tower, p,,, 
CB3 


=== PDF PAGE 571 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 555 
At the bottom of the tower p,, 
= pA2, so 
1 
C - - 
(10 020 - 100) = 793.6 mol/m3 
B2 - 12.5 
Step 2. Form of rate equation to use. Check both ends of the tower: 
kAgapA = (0.32)(20) = 6.4 mol/hr . m3 
at top 
kpCB = (0.1)(800) = 80 mol/hr . m3 
kAgapA = (0.32)(100) = 32 
at bottom 
k,aC, = (0.1)(793.6) = 79.36 
At both ends of the tower kAgpA < klCB; therefore, gas-phase resistance controls 
and we have a pseudo first-order reaction as given by Eq. 16 of Chapter 23 
Step 3. Height of tower. From Eq. 10 
Comment. Even though the liquid phase controls in physical absorption (see 
Example 24.1), it does not necessarily follow that it should still control when 
reaction occurs. In fact, we see here in Example 24.2 that it is the gas phase 
alone which influences the rate of the overall process. Reaction serves merely 
to eliminate the resistance of the liquid film. Also note the remarkable improve- 
ment in performance; 5 versus 500 m. 
TOWERS FOR LOW CONCENTRATION OF LIQUID 
REACTANT; CASE A 
I 
I 
Repeat Example 24.2 using a feed with CB, = 32 mol/m3, instead of 800 moll 
m3, see Fig. E24.3. 


=== PDF PAGE 572 ===
556 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Figure E24.3 
As in the previous examples, solve by making a material balance, check the 
form of rate equation to use, then apply the performance equation to find the 
tower height. 
Step 1. Material Balance. As in Example 24.2, for any point in the tower, 
and for the bottom of the tower where p, = 100 Pa, 
Step 2. Which Rate firm to Use. Again check both ends of the tower to see 
which rate form applies 
kA,apA = 0.32(20) = 6.4 
at top 
klaCB = 0.1(32) = 3.2 
kQapA = 0.32(100) = 32 
at bottom 
klaCB = 0.1(35.6) = 2.56 
At both ends of the tower kAgapA > k,aCB, therefore, the reaction takes place 
within the liquid film and Eq. 13 in Chapter 23 should be used, 
reactor. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 573 ===
24.2 
Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 557 
I 
Step 3. Height of Tower. From Eq. 6, 
TOWERS FOR INTERMEDIATE CONCENTRATIONS OF 
LIQUID REACTANT 
Repeat Example 24.2 using a feed in which CB = 128 mol/m3. 
SOLUTION 
Refer to Fig. E24.4, and solve as with the previous examples. 
--- 0 
1 
Reaction at 
interface 
Reaction in 
liquid film 
--- @ 
P A 2 = 1 0 0 ~ a >  
b c B 2 = ?  
Figure E24.4 
Step 1. Material balance. As with Examples 24.2 and 24.3 we have at any point 
in the tower, 
and at the bottom of the tower, 
Step 2. Form of rate equation to use. Check both ends of the tower: 
kAgapA = 6.4 rnollhr m3 
at top 
klaCB = 12.8 mol . hr . m3 
kAgapA = 32 
at bottom 
k,aC, = 12.16 


=== PDF PAGE 574 ===
558 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
At the top kAgpA < klCB; hence, Eq. 16 in Chapter 23 must be used. At the 
bottom kAgpA > k,CB; hence, Eq. 13 in Chapter 23 must be used. 
Let us now find the condition at which the reaction zone just reaches the 
interface and where the form of rate equation changes. This occurs where 
Solving with the material balance we find that the change occurs at pA = 39.5 Pa. 
Step 3. Height of Tower. Writing the performance equation we have, from Eq. 6, 
Noting that two different rate forms must be used, we have 
(iii) 
Comment. In this example we see that two distinct zones are present. Situations 
may be encountered where even another zone may be present. For example, if 
the entering liquid contains insufficient reactant, a point is reached in the tower 
where all this reactant is consumed. Below this point physical absorption alone 
takes place in reactant-free liquid. The methods of these examples, when used 
together, deal in a straightforward manner with this three-zone situation and 
van Krevelens and Hoftijzer (1948) discuss actual situations where these three 
distinct zones are present. 
Comparing solutions for the four examples shows how reaction increases the 
effectiveness of the absorption process. 
REDO EXAMPLE 24.2 BY THE GENERAL METHOD 
In Example 24.2 we found which of the eight special cases (see Fig. 23.3) applied 
and then used its corresponding rate equation (it was Eq. 23.16). Alternatively 
we could have used the general rate expression (Eq. 23.5). This is what we will 
show here. 


=== PDF PAGE 575 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 559 
1 SOLUTION 
From Example 24.2 a material balance gives the tower end conditions, as shown 
in Fig. E24.5. Now the rate of reaction at any point in the tower is, from Eq. 23.5, 
Figure E24.5 
Evaluate E at various points in the tower. For this we need to first evaluate MH 
and E,. 
At the Top of the Tower. From Fig. 23.4 
MH = 
= W ,  
because k = w 
k,, 
(ii) 
We have to guess the value of p,,. It can be anywhere between 0 Pa (gas film 
controls) up to 20 Pa (liquid film controls). Let us guess no gas-phase resistance. 
Then pAi = p,, in which case 
and from Fig. 23.4, for MH = a, Ei = 500, we see that 


=== PDF PAGE 576 ===
560 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Replacing in Eq. (i) we find 
<93% 
b% 
... resistance 
Our guess was wrong, so let's try again. Let us guess the other extreme, pAi = 
0, meaning that the total resistance is in the gas film. Then from Eq. (ii) we see 
that Ei = w, E = co and the rate equation becomes 
(iii) 
Thus our guess was correct. 
At the Bottom of the Tower. We follow the same procedure and find the same 
result. Thus the rate at all points in the tower is given by Eq. (iii). The height 
of the tower, from Eq. 10, is then (see step 3 of Example 24.2) 
Suggestion. Whenever MH > Ei we end up having to guess pAi, and that is 
tedious. In those cases try to use the special case expressions. 
In other cases (and this is what we usually find) the general rate equation is 
easier to use. 
/ EXAMPLE 24.6 
REACTION OF A BATCH OF LIQUID 
We wish to lower the concentration of B in the liquid (V, = 1.62 m3, C, = 
55555.6 mol/m3) of an agitated tank reactor by bubbling gas (F, = 9000 mollhr, 
n = lo5 Pa) containing A (pAh = 1000 Pa) through it. A and B react as follows: 
(a) How long must we bubble gas through the vessel to lower the concentration 
from C, = 555.6 to CBf = 55.6 mol/m3? 
(b) What percent of entering A passes through the vessel unreacted? 
I 
Additional Data 
k,,a 
= 0.72 mollhr . m3. Pa 
f, = 0.9 m3 liquid/m3 total 
kA,a = 144 hr-I 
gA 
= qB 
= 3.6 X 
m2/hr, 
a = 100 m2/m3 
HA = lo3 Pa. m3/mol 
k = 2.6 x los m3/mol. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 577 ===
24.2 Mass Transfer Plus Not Very Slow Reaction 561 
Figure E24.6 
I SOLUTION 
Let us sketch what is known in Fig. E24.6. 
- 555 
555.6, or higher 
E i = l +  - 
- 
p Ai 
1000 
Since pA 4 n and E = MH the text says we can use the shortcut outlined above 
Eq. 19. Let us do it. 
At the end, following a similar treatment, we find 
M H z  5 
E = M H =  5.0 
Ei 
= 55.6, or higher 


=== PDF PAGE 578 ===
562 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
The rate of reaction at the beginning and at the end of the run is just about the 
same, so 
Thus the run time needed is 
The minimum time required is 
t .  = 
vdcBO 
- c ~ f )  - 
- 1.62(555.6 - 55.6) 
= 8.91 hr 
min 
Fg(pAi,l(a - pAin)) 9000(1000/(105 - 100)) = 
Thus the fraction of reactant which passes through the tank untreated is 
Fraction = 9'13 - 8'91 = 0.025 = 
8.19 
- 
REFERENCES 
van Krevelens, D. W., and Hoftijzer, P., Rec. Trau. Chim., 67, 563 (1948). 
Kramers, H., and Westerterp, K. R., Elements of Chemical Reactor Design and Operation, 
PROBLEMS 
24.1. The four pA versus CA sketches of Fig. 24.2 represent various possible 
ideal contacting schemes of gas with liquid. Sketch the contacting scheme 
for straight physical absorption corresponding to the p, versus CA op- 
erating lines X Y  shown in Fig. P24.1. 
(a) 
(6) 
(c) 
Figure P24.1 


=== PDF PAGE 579 ===
Problems 563 
We plan to remove about 90% of the A present in a gas stream by 
absorption in water which contains reactant B. Chemicals A and B react 
in the liquid as follows: 
B has a negligible vapor pressure, hence does not go into the gas phase. 
We plan to do this absorption in either a packed bed column, or an 
agitated tank contactor. 
(a) What volume of contactor is needed? 
(b) Where does the resistance of absorption reaction lie? 
Data 
For the gas stream: 
Fg = 90 000 mollhr at n = lo5 Pa 
p, 
= 1000 Pa 
pAout = 100 Pa 
Physical data 
CB = 3.6 X 
m2/hr 
C, = 55 556 mol H20/m3 liquid, at all CB 
For the packed bed 
Fl = 900 000 mol/hr 
kAla = 72 hr-l 
CBi, = 55.56 mol/m3 
a = 100 m2/m3 
kka = 0.36 mollhr . m3. Pa 
fi = Vl/V = 0.08 
For the agitated tank 
Fl = 9000 mol/hr 
kAla = 144 hr-l 
CBin = 5556 mol/m3 (about 10% B) 
a = 200 m2/m3 
kAga = 0.72 mol/hr . m3. Pa 
fi = Vl/V = 0.9 
Note that Fl and CBin are very different in packed beds and tank contactors, 
and here is the reason why. Packed columns need Fl/Fg = 10 for satisfactory 
operations. This means large F,, and so as not to waste reactant B, it is 
introduced in low concentration. On the other hand, tank contactors do 
not have this flow restriction. Thus we can use low Fl and high CBin, as 
long as we introduce sufficient B to react with A. 


=== PDF PAGE 580 ===
564 
Chapter 24 Fluid-Fluid Reactors: Design 
Henry's Law 
For 
Constant: HA, 
Reaction: k, 
Pa. m3/mol 
m3/mol. hr 
Type of 
Contactor 
T = Tower, 
Countercurrent 
A = Agitated 
Tank 
In these problems 
A 
of straight mass 
transfer assume 
T 
that no B is 
present in the 
T 
system. 
24.11. Danckwerts and Gillham, in Trans. I. Chem. E., 44, 42, March 1966, 
studied the rate of CO, absorption into an alkaline buffered solution of 
K2C03 and KHCO,. The resulting reaction can be represented as 
CO,(g -1) + OH-(1) -+HCO; 
with 
-r, = kCACB 
(A) 
(B) 
In the experiment pure CO, at 1 atm was bubbled into a packed column 
irrigated by rapidly recirculating solution kept at 20°C and close to con- 
stant C,. Find the fraction of entering CO, absorbed. 
Data 
Column: V, = 0.6041 m3 
f, = 0.08 
a = 120 m2/m3 
Gas: 
n = 101 325 Pa 
HA = 3500 Pa. m3/mol v, = 0.0363 m3/s 
Liquid: CB = 300 mol/m3 
gA, = gB1 
= 1.4 x 
m2/s 
Rates: 
k = 0.433 m3/mol. s 
kAla = 0.025 s-I 
This problem is by Barry Kelly. 
24.12. A column packed with 5-cm polypropylene saddles (a = 55 m2/m3) is 
being designed for the removal of chlorine from a gas stream (G = 100 
molls .m2, 2.36% Cl,) by countercurrent contact with an NaOH solution 


=== PDF PAGE 581 ===
Problems 565 
(L = 250 mol/s.m2, 10% NaOH, C, = 2736 mol/m3) at about 40-45°C 
and 1 atm. 
How high should the tower be for 99% removal of chlorine? Double 
the calculated height to take care of deviations from plug flow. 
Data 
The reaction C1, + 2NaOH -+ product is very very fast and irreversible. 
For these very high flow rates (close to the limits allowed) an extrapolation 
of the correlations in Perry 6th ed., section 14, gives 
k,a = 133 mollhr . m3. atm 
HA = 125 X 106 atm . m3/mol 
k,a = 45 hr-l 
= 1.5 X 
m2/s 
Repeat Example 24.6 with the following two changes 
Henry's Law Constant 
Second-Order Reaction Rate, Constant 
HA, Pa. m3/mol 
k, m3/mol. hr 


=== PDF PAGE 582 ===
Chapter 25 
Fluid-Particle Reactions: 
Kinetics 
This chapter treats the class of heterogeneous reactions in which a gas or liquid 
contacts a solid, reacts with it, and transforms it into product. Such reactions 
may be represented by 
A(fluid) + bB(so1id) 4 fluid products 
(1) 
+solid products 
(2) 
+fluid and solid products 
(3) 
As shown in Fig. 25.1, solid particles remain unchanged in size during reaction 
when they contain large amounts of impurities which remain as a nonflaking ash 
or if they form a firm product material by the reactions of Eq. 2 or Eq. 3. Particles 
shrink in size during reaction when a flaking ash or product material is formed 
or when pure B is used in the reaction of Eq. 1. 
Fluid-solid reactions are numerous and of great industrial importance. Those 
in which the solid does not appreciably change in size during reaction are as 
follows. 
1. The roasting (or oxidation) of sulfide ores to yield the metal oxides. For 
example, in the preparation of zinc oxide the sulfide ore is mined, crushed, 
separated from the gangue by flotation, and then roasted in a reactor to 
form hard white zinc oxide particles according to the reaction 
Similarly, iron pyrites react as follows: 
2. The preparation of metals from their oxides by reaction in reducing atmo- 
spheres. For example, iron is prepared from crushed and sized magnetite 


=== PDF PAGE 583 ===
Particle Size 567 
Initial 
Partly 
Completely 
unreacted 
reacted 
reacted 
particle 
particle 
particle 
Time 
Time 
Final particle is 
- - 
hard, firm, and 
unchanged in size 
Initial 
unreacted 
particle 
Time 
Time 
Time 
Particle shrinks 
- 
@ - 
o 
with time, finally 
disappearing. 
Flaking ash or gaseous 
products cause 
shrinkage in size 
Figure 25.1 Different sorts of behavior of reacting solid particles. 
ore in continuous-countercurrent, three-stage, fluidized-bed reactors ac- 
cording to the reaction 
3. The nitrogenation of calcium carbide to produce cyanamide 
4. The protective surface treatment of solids such as the plating of metals. 
The most common examples of fluid-solid reactions in which the size of solid 
changes are the reactions of carbonaceous materials such as coal briquettes, 
wood, etc. with low ash content to produce heat or heating fuels. For example, 
with an insufficient amount of air, producer gas is formed by the reactions 
With steam, water gas is obtained by the reactions 


=== PDF PAGE 584 ===
568 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetio 
Other examples of reactions in which solids change in size are as follows. 
1. The manufacture of carbon disulfide from the elements 
2. The manufacture of sodium cyanide from sodium amide 
3. The manufacture of sodium thiosulfate from sulfur and sodium sulfite 
Still other examples are the dissolution reactions, the attack of metal chips by 
acids, and the rusting of iron. 
In Chapter 17 we pointed out that the treatment of heterogeneous reaction 
required the consideration of two factors in addition to those normally encoun- 
tered in homogeneous reactions: the modification of the kinetic expressions 
resulting from the mass transfer between phases and the contacting patterns of 
the reacting phases. 
In this chapter we develop the rate expressions for fluid-solid reactions. The 
next chapter will then use this information in design. 
25.1 SELECTION OF A MODEL 
We should clearly understand that every conceptual picture or model for the 
progress of reaction comes with its mathematical representation, its rate equation. 
Consequently, if we choose a model we must accept its rate equation, and vice 
versa. If a model corresponds closely to what really takes place, then its rate 
expression will closely predict and describe the actual kinetics; if a model differs 
widely from reality, then its kinetic expressions will be useless. We must remem- 
ber that the most elegant and high-powered mathematical analysis based on a 
model which does not match reality is worthless for the engineer who must make 
design predictions. What we say here about a model holds not only in deriving 
kinetic expressions but in all areas of engineering. 
The requirement for a good engineering model is that it be the closest represen- 
tation of reality which can be treated without too many mathematical complexi- 
ties. It is of little use to select a model which very closely mirrors reality but 
which is so complicated that we cannot do anything with it. Unfortunately, in 
today's age of computers, this all too often happens. 
For the noncatalytic reaction of particles with surrounding fluid, we consider 
two simple idealized models, the progressive-conversion model and the shrinking 
unreacted-core model. 
Progressive-Conversion Model (PCM). Here we visualize that reactant gas 
enters and reacts throughout the particle at all times, most likely at different 
rates at different locations within the particle. Thus, solid reactant is converted 
continuously and progressively throughout the particle as shown in Fig. 25.2. 


=== PDF PAGE 585 ===
25.1 Selection 0.f a Model 569 
Low 
conversion 
High 
conversion 
Radial position 
Figure 25.2 According to the progressive-conversion model, reaction pro- 
ceeds continuously throughout the solid particle. 
Shrinking-Core Model (SCM). Here we visualize that reaction occurs first at 
the outer skin of the particle. The zone of reaction then moves into the solid, 
leaving behind completely converted material and inert solid. We refer to these 
as "ash." Thus, at any time there exists an unreacted core of material which 
shrinks in size during reaction, as shown in Fig. 25.3. 
Comparison of Models with Real Situations. In slicing and examining the cross 
section of partly reacted solid particles, we usually find unreacted solid material 
surrounded by a layer of ash. The boundary of this unreacted core may not 
Low 
Ash 
Time * 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
zone 
I 
I 
+ 
0, 
c 1 ,  , ,I* 
I I I k*
I 
I 
.2 E 
4- 0 
I 
m m  
I 
$ 9  
1 
I 
I 
8.2 
1 
I 
I 
SSI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
R
O
R
 
R
O
R
 
R
O
R
 
Radial position 
Figure 25.3 According to the shrinking-core model, reaction pro- 
ceeds at a narrow front which moves into the solid particle. Reactant 
is completely converted as the front passes by. 


=== PDF PAGE 586 ===
570 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
always be as sharply defined as the model pictures it; nevertheless, evidence 
from a wide variety of situations indicates that in most cases the shrinking-core 
model (SCM) approximates real particles more closely than does the progressive- 
conversion model (PCM). Observations with burning coal, wood, briquettes, and 
tightly wrapped newspapers also favor the shrinking-core model. For further 
discussion on the many other models used (at least ten), see Chapter 55 in 
Levenspiel (1996). 
Since the SCM seems to reasonably represent reality in a wide variety of 
situations, we develop its kinetic equations in the following section. In doing this 
we consider the surrounding fluid to be a gas. However, this is done only for 
convenience since the analysis applies equally well to liquids. 
25.2 
SHRINKING-CORE MODEL FOR SPHERICAL PARTICLES 
OF UNCHANGING SIZE 
This model was first developed by Yagi and Kunii (1955, 1961), who visualized 
five steps occurring in succession during reaction (see Fig. 25.4). 
Step 1. Diffusion of gaseous reactant A through the film surrounding the 
particle to the surface of the solid. 
Step 2. Penetration and diffusion of A through the blanket of ash to the surface 
of the unreacted core. 
Step 3. Reaction of gaseous A with solid at this reaction surface. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
l
l
 I
 
t 
R  
rc 
0 
r c r R  
Radial position 
Figure 25.4 Representation of concentrations of reactants and prod- 
ucts for the reaction A(g) + bB(s) -+ solid product for a particle 
of unchanging size. 


=== PDF PAGE 587 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 571 
Step 4. Diffusion of gaseous products through the ash back to the exterior 
surface of the solid. 
Step 5. Diffusion of gaseous products through the gas film back into the main 
body of fluid. 
In some situations some of these steps do not exist. For example, if no gaseous 
products are formed, steps 4 and 5 do not contribute directly to the resistance 
to reaction. Also, the resistances of the different steps usually vary greatly one 
from the other. In such cases we may consider that step with the highest resistance 
to be rate-controlling. 
In this treatment we develop the conversion equations for spherical particles 
in which steps 1, 2, and 3, in turn, are rate-controlling. We then extend the 
analysis to nonspherical particles and to situations where the combined effect 
of these three resistances must be considered. 
Diffusion Through Gas Film Controls 
Whenever the resistance of the gas film controls, the concentration profile for 
gaseous reactant A will be shown as in Fig. 25.5. From this figure we see that 
no gaseous reactant is present at the particle surface; hence, the concentration 
driving force, CAg - C, becomes C,, and is constant at all times during reaction 
of the particle. Now since it is convenient to derive the kinetic equations based 
on available surface, we focus attention on the unchanging exterior surface of a 
particle S,. Noting from the stoichiometry of Eqs. 1,2, and 3 that dNB = bdNA, 
we write 
1 dNB - 
1 dNB - 
b dNA = bkg(CAg - C,) 
= bkgCAg = constant 
(4) 
S, dt 
4nR2 dt 
4n-R2 dt 
1 - 
/Surface 
of shrinking 
.--- 
unreacted core 
,/ 
 as film '\, 
Surface of particle 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Concentration 
* 
R 
r 
0 r 
R 
Radial position 
Figure 25.5 Representation of a reacting particle when diffusion 
through the gas film is the controlling resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 588 ===
572 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
If we let p, be the molar density of B in the solid and V  be the volume of a 
particle, the amount of B present in a particle is 
N B = e V =  (~2:) 
--- (m3 solid) 
The decrease in volume or radius of unreacted core accompanying the disappear- 
ance of dNB moles of solid reactant is then given by 
Replacing Eq. 6 in 4 gives the rate of reaction in terms of the shrinking radlus 
of unreacted core, or 
where kg is the mass transfer coefficient between fluid and particle; see the 
discussion leading up to Eq. 24. Rearranging and integrating, we find how the 
unreacted core shrinks with time. Thus, 
Let the time for complete conversion of a particle be 7. Then by taking r, = 0 
in Eq. 8, we find 
The radius of unreacted core in terms of fractional time for complete conversion 
is obtained by combining Eqs. 8 and 9, or 
This can be written in terms of fractional conversion by noting that 


=== PDF PAGE 589 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 573 
Therefore 
Thus we obtain the relationship of time with radius and with conversion, which 
is shown graphically in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 
Diffusion through Ash Layer Controls 
Figure 25.6 illustrates the situation in which the resistance to diffusion through 
the ash controls the rate of reaction. To develop an expression between time 
and radius, such as Eq. 8 for film resistance, requires a two-step analysis. First 
examine a typical partially reacted particle, writing the flux relationships for this 
condition. Then apply this relationship for all values of r,; in other words, inte- 
grate r, between R and 0. 
Consider a partially reacted particle as shown in Fig. 25.6. Both reactant A 
and the boundary of the unreacted core move inward toward the center of the 
particle. But for GIS systems the shrinkage of the unreacted core is slower than 
the flow rate of A toward the unreacted core by a factor of about 1000, which 
is roughly the ratio of densities of solid to gas. Because of this it is reasonable 
for us to assume, in considering the concentration gradient of A in the ash layer 
at any time, that the unreacted core is stationary. 
QAs =flux of A through exterior surface 
of particle (inward +, outward -) 
QA = flux of A through surface 
of any radius r 
QA, =flux of A to the reaction surface 
Typical position in diffusion region 
I '. 
I 
1 
7---- 
T
I
 
I ,Y 
I I 
I 
4 
I 
I 
I
I
 I 
I 
I
I
 I 
Radial position 
Figure 25.6 Representation of a reacting particle when diffusion through the ash 
layer is the controlling resistance. 


=== PDF PAGE 590 ===
574 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
With L I S  systems we have a problem because the velocity ratio is closer to unity 
than to 1000. Yoshida et al. (1975) consider a relaxation of the above assumption. 
For GIS systems the use of the steady-state assumption allows great simplifica- 
tion in the mathematics which follows. Thus the rate of reaction of A at any 
instant is given by its rate of diffusion to the reaction surface, or 
-- 
dNA - 
- 4nr2QA = 4rR2Q, = 4rr:QA, = constant 
dt 
(12) 
For convenience, let the flux of A within the ash layer be expressed by Fick's 
law for equimolar counterdiffusion, though other forms of this diffusion equation 
will give the same result. Then, noting that both QA and dCA/dr are positive, 
we have 
where CZje is the effective diffusion coefficient of gaseous reactant in the ash layer. 
Often it is difficult to assign a value beforehand to this quantity because the 
property of the ash (its sintering qualities, for example) can be very sensitive to 
small amounts of impurities in the solid and to small variations in the particle's 
environment. Combining Eqs. 12 and 13, we obtain for any r 
-- 
- 
~ C A  
dNA - 4rr2ge - 
= constant 
dt 
dr 
Integrating across the ash layer form R to r,, we obtain 
This expression represents the conditions of a reacting particle at any time. 
In the second part of the analysis we let the size of unreacted core change 
with time. For a given size of unreacted core, dNA/dt is constant; however, as 
the core shrinks the ash layer becomes thicker, lowering the rate of diffusion of 
A. Consequently, integration of Eq. 15 with respect to time and other variables 
should yield the required relationship. But we note that this equation contains 
three variables, t, NA, and r,, one of which must be eliminated or written in 
terms of the other variables before integration can be performed. As with film 
diffusion, let us eliminate NA by writing it in terms of r,. This relationship is 
given by Eq. 6; hence, replacing in Eq. 15, separating variables, and integrating, 


=== PDF PAGE 591 ===
25.2 Shrinking-Core Model for Spherical Particles of Unchanging Size 575 
we obtain 
For the complete conversion of a particle, r, = 0, and the time required is 
The progression of reaction in terms of the time required for complete conversion 
is found by dividing Eq. 16 by Eq. 17, or 
t 
3 
- = 1 - 3 ( 2 ) 2 + 2 ( $ )  
T 
which in terms of fractional conversion, as given in Eq. 10, becomes 
t - = 1 - 3(1 - XB)'l3 + 2(1 - xB) 
7 
These results are presented graphically in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 
Chemical Reaction Controls 
Figure 25.7 illustrates concentration gradients within a particle when chemical 
reaction controls. Since the progress of the reaction is unaffected by the presence 
of any ash layer, the rate is proportional to the available surface of unreacted 
core. Thus, based on unit surface of unreacted core, r,, the rate of reaction for 
the stoichiometry of Eqs. 1, 2, and 3 is 
where k is the first-order rate constant for the surface reaction. Writing NB in 
terms of the shrinking radius, as given in Eq. 6, we obtain 


=== PDF PAGE 592 ===
576 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
,---- 
. 
,// Gas film \, 
R 
r, 0 r, 
R 
Radial position 
Figure 25.7 Representation of a reacting particle when chem- 
ical reaction is the controlling resistance, the reaction being 
A(g) + bB(s) --, products. 
which on integration becomes 
The time r required for complete conversion is given when rc = 0, or 
The decrease in radius or increase in fractional conversion of the particle in 
terms of r is found by combining Eqs. 21 and 22. Thus, 
This result is plotted in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583. 


=== PDF PAGE 593 ===
25.3 Rate of Reaction for Shrinking Spherical Particles 577 
25.3 
RATE OF REACTION FOR SHRINKING SPHERICAL PARTICLES 
When no ash forms, as in the burning of pure carbon in air, the reacting particle 
shrinks during reaction, finally disappearing. This process is illustrated in Fig. 
25.8. For a reaction of this kind we visualize the following three steps occurring 
in succession. 
Step 1. Diffusion of reactant A from the main body of gas through the gas 
film to the surface of the solid. 
Step 2. Reaction on the surface between reactant A and solid. 
Step 3. Diffusion of reaction products from the surface of the solid through 
the gas film back into the main body of gas. Note that the ash layer 
is absent and does not contribute any resistance. 
As with particles of constant size, let us see what rate expressions result when 
one or the other of the resistances controls. 
Chemical Reaction Controls 
When chemical reaction controls, the behavior is identical to that of particles 
of unchanging size; therefore, Fig. 25.7 and Eq. 21 or 23 will represent the 
conversion-time behavior of single particles, both shrinking and of constant size. 
Gas Film Diffusion Controls 
Film resistance at the surface of a particle is dependent on numerous factors, 
such as the relative velocity between particle and fluid, size of particle, and fluid 
properties. These have been correlated for various ways of contacting fluid with 
R 
O
R
 
Radial position 
Figure 25.8 Representation of concentration of reactants and 
products for the reaction A(g) + bB(s) -+ rR(g) between a 
shrinking solid particle and gas. 


=== PDF PAGE 594 ===
578 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
solid, such as packed beds, fluidized beds, and solids in free fall. As an example, 
for mass transfer of a component of mole fraction y in a fluid to free-falling 
solids Froessling (1938) gives 
During reaction a particle changes in size; hence kg also varies. In general kg 
rises for an increase in gas velocity and for smaller particles. As an example, 
Fig. 12 and Eq. 24 show that 
for small d, and u 
kg - - 
dP 
u1/2 
kg - - for large dp and u 
d;I2 
(26) 
Equation 25 represents particles in the Stokes law regime. Let us develop conver- 
sion-time expressions for such particles. 
Stokes Regime (Small Particles). At the time when a particle, originally of size 
R,, has shrunk to size R, we may write 
Thus, analogous to Eq. 7, we have 
Since in the Stokes regime Eq. 24 reduces to 
we have on combining and integrating 


=== PDF PAGE 595 ===
25.4 Extensions 579 
The time for complete disappearance of a particle is thus 
and on combining we obtain 
This relationship of size versus time for shrinking particles in the Stokes regime 
is shown in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10, pp. 582 and 583, and it well represents small 
burning solid particles and small burning liquid droplets. 
25.4 EXTENSIONS 
Particles of Different Shape. Conversion-time equations similar to those devel- 
oped above can be obtained for various-shaped particles, and Table 25.1 summa- 
rizes these expressions. 
Combination of Resistances. The above conversion-time expressions assume 
that a single resistance controls throughout reaction of the particle. However, 
the relative importance of the gas film, ash layer, and reaction steps will vary as 
particle conversion progresses. For example, for a constant size particle the gas 
film resistance remains unchanged, the resistance to reaction increases as the 
surface of unreacted core decreases, while the ash layer resistance is nonexistent 
at the start because no ash is present, but becomes progressively more and more 
important as the ash layer builds up. In general, then, it may not be reasonable 
to consider that just one step controls throughout reaction. 
To account for the simultaneous action of these resistances is straightforward 
since they act in series and are all linear in concentration. Thus on combining 
Eqs. 7,15, and 20 with their individual driving forces and eliminating intermediate 
concentrations we can show that the time to reach any stage of conversion is 
the sum of the times needed if each resistance acted alone, or 
ttotal = &lrn alone + tash alone + treaction alone 
Similarly, for complete conversion 
I 
7total = 7film alone + 7ash alone + 7reaction alone 
In an alternative approach, the individual resistances can be combined directly 
to give, at any particular stage of conversion, 


=== PDF PAGE 596 ===


=== PDF PAGE 597 ===
25.4 Extensions 581 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - 
filn 
ash 
reaction 
As may be seen, the relative importance of the three individual resistances varies 
as conversion progresses, or as r, decreases. 
On considering the whole progression from fresh to completely converted 
constant size particle, we find on the average that the relative roles of these 
three resistances is given by 
For ash-free particles which shrink with reaction, only two resistances, gas film 
and surface reaction, need to be considered. Because these are both based on 
the changing exterior surface of particles, we may combine them to give at 
any instant 
Various forms of these expressions have been derived by Yagi and Kunii (1955), 
Shen and Smith (1965), and White and Carberry (1965). 
Limitations of the Shrinking Core Model. The assumptions of this model may 
not match reality precisely. For example, reaction may occur along a diffuse 
front rather than along a sharp interface between ash and fresh solid, thus giving 
behavior intermediate between the shrinking core and the continuous reaction 
models. This problem is considered by Wen (1968), and Ishida and Wen (1971). 
Also, for fast reaction the rate of heat release may be high enough to cause 
significant temperature gradients within the particles or between particle and 
the bulk fluid. This problem is treated in detail by Wen and Wang (1970). 
Despite these complications Wen (1968) and Ishida et al. (1971), on the basis 
of studies of numerous systems, conclude that the shrinking core model is the 
best simple representation for the majority of reacting gas-solid systems. 
There are, however, two broad classes of exceptions to this conclusion. The 
first comes with the slow reaction of a gas with a very porous solid. Here reaction 
can occur throughout the solid, in which situation the continuous reaction model 
may be expected to better fit reality. An example of this is the slow poisoning 
of a catalyst pellet, a situation treated in Chapter 21. 
The second exception occurs when solid is converted by the action of heat, 
and without needing contact with gas. Baking bread, boiling missionaries, and 


=== PDF PAGE 598 ===
582 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
roasting puppies are mouthwatering examples of such reactions. Here again the 
continuous reaction model is a better representation of reality. Wen (1968) and 
Kunii and Levenspiel (1991) treat these kinetics. 
25.5 DETERMINATION OF THE RATE-CONTROLLING STEP 
The kinetics and rate-controlling steps of a fluid-solid reaction are deduced by 
noting how the progressive conversion of particles is influenced by particle size 
and operating temperature. This information can be obtained in various ways, 
depending on the facilities available and the materials at hand. The following 
observations are a guide to experimentation and to the interpretation of experi- 
mental data. 
Temperature. The chemical step is usually much more temperature-sensitive 
than the physical steps; hence, experiments at different temperatures should 
easily distinguish between ash or film diffusion on the one hand and chemical 
reaction on the other hand as the controlling step. 
Time. Figures 25.9 and 25.10 show the progressive conversion of spherical solids 
when chemical reaction, film diffusion, and ash diffusion in turn control. Results 
of kinetic runs compared with these predicted curves should indicate the rate- 
controlling step. Unfortunately, the difference between ash diffusion and chemi- 
cal reaction as controlling steps is not great and may be masked by the scatter 
in experimental data. 
t/7 
Figure 25.9 Progress of reaction of a single spherical particle 
with surrounding fluid measured in terms of time for com- 
plete reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 599 ===
25.5 Determination of the Rate-Controlling Step 583 
Figure 25.10 Progress of reaction of a single spherical particle 
with surrounding fluid measured in terms of time for com- 
plete conversion. 
Conversion-time curves analogous to those in Figs. 25.9 and 25.10 can be 
prepared for other solid shapes by using the equations of Table 25.1. 
Particle Size. Equations 16, 21, and 8 with Eq. 24 or 25 show that the time 
needed to achieve the same fractional conversion for particles of different but 
unchanging sizes is given by 
t cc R1.5 
to 2.0 
for film diffusion controlling (the exponent drops as 
Reynolds number rises) 
(36) 
t cc R2 
for ash diffusion controlling 
(37) 
tccR 
for chemical reaction controlling 
(38) 
Thus kinetic runs with different sizes of particles can distinguish between reac- 
tions in which the chemical and physical steps control. 
Ash Versus Film Resistance. When a hard solid ash forms during reaction, the 
resistance of gas-phase reactant through this ash is usually much greater than 
through the gas film surrounding the particle. Hence in the presence of a nonflak- 
ing ash layer, film resistance can safely be ignored. In addition, ash resistance is 
unaffected by changes in gas velocity. 
Predictability of Film Resistance. The magnitude of film resistance can be 
estimated from dimensionless correlations such as Eq. 24. Thus an observed rate 
approximately equal to the calculated rate suggests that film resistance controls. 


=== PDF PAGE 600 ===
584 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
t 
Chemical reaction 
step controls 
Temperature (n 
Figure 25.11 Because of the series relationship 
among the resistances to reaction, the net or ob- 
served rate is never higher than for any of the 
individual steps acting alone. 
Overall Versus Individual Resistance. If a plot of individual rate coefficients 
is made as a function of temperature, as shown in Fig. 25.11, the overall coefficient 
given by Eq. 34 or 35 cannot be higher than any of the individual coefficients. 
With these observations we can usually discover with a small, carefully planned 
experimental program which is the controlling mechanism. 
Let us illustrate the interplay of resistances with the well-studied gas-solid 
reaction of pure carbon particles with oxygen: 
C + 0, + co, 
[B(s) + A(g) +gaseous products] 
with rate equation 
Since no ash is formed at any time during reaction, we have here a case of 
kinetics of shrinking particles for which two resistances at most, surface reaction 
and gas film, may play a role. In terms of these, the overall rate constant at any 
instant from Eq. 35 is 


=== PDF PAGE 601 ===
25.5 Determination of the Rate-Controlling Step 585 
Figure 25.12 Rate of combustion of pure carbon particles; this figure 
is adapted from Yagi and Kunii (1955). 
kg is given by Eq. 24, while k" is given by the following expression of Parker 
and Hottel (1936): 
where R is in J/mol.K, T is in kelvin, and C, 
is in gram moles per liter. 
Figure 25.12 shows all this information in convenient graphical form and allows 
determination of a" for different values of the system variables. Note that when 
film resistance controls, the reaction is rather temperature insensitive but is 
dependent on particle size and relative velocity between solid and gas. This is 
shown by the family of lines, close to parallel and practically horizontal. 


=== PDF PAGE 602 ===
586 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
In extrapolating to new untried operating conditions, we must know when to 
be prepared for a change in controlling step and when we may reasonably expect 
the rate-controlling step not to change. For example, for particles with nonflaking 
ash a rise in temperature and to a lesser extent an increase in particle size may 
cause the rate to switch from reaction to ash diffusion controlling. For reactions 
in which ash is not present, a rise in temperature will cause a shift from reaction 
to film resistance controlling. 
On the other hand, if ash diffusion already controls, then a rise in temperature 
should not cause it to shift to reaction control or film diffusion control. 
REFERENCES 
Froessling, N., Gerland Beitr. Geophys., 52, 170 (1938). 
Ishida, M., and Wen, C. Y., Chem. Eng. Sci., 26, 1031 (1971). 
Ishida, M., Wen, C. Y., and Shirai, T., Chem. Eng. Sci., 26, 1043 (1971). 
Kunii, D., and Levenspiel, O., Fluidization Engineering, 2nd edition, Butterworth, Boston, 
MA, 1991. 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR, 1996. 
Parker, A. L., and Hottel, H. C., Znd. Eng. Chem., 28, 1334 (1936). 
Shen, J., and Smith, J. M., Znd. Eng. Chem. Fund., 4,293 (1965). 
Wen, C. Y., Znd. Eng. Chem., 60 (9), 34 (1968). 
Wen, C. Y., and Wang, S. C., Znd. Eng. Chem., 62 (8), 30 (1970). 
White, D. E., and Carberry, J. J., Can. J. Chem. Eng., 43, 334 (1965). 
Yagi, S., and Kunii, D., 5th Symposium (International) on Combustion, Reinhold, New 
York, 1955, p. 231; Chem. Eng. (Japan), 19,500 (1955). 
Yagi, S., and Kunii, D., Chem. Eng. Sci., 16, 364, 372, 380 (1961). 
Yoshida, K., Kunii, D., and Shimizu, F. J., Chem. Eng. (Japan), 8,417 (1975). 
PROBLEMS 
25.1. A batch of solids of uniform size is treated by gas in a uniform environ- 
ment. Solid is converted to give a nonflaking product according to the 
shrinking-core model. Conversion is about $ for a reaction time of 1 h, 
conversion is complete in two hours. What mechanism is rate controlling? 
25.2. In a shady spot at the end of Brown Street in Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, 
stands a Civil War memorial-a 
brass general, a brass cannon which 
persistent undergraduate legend insists may still fire some day, and a stack 
of iron cannonballs. At the time this memorial was set up, 1868, the 
cannonballs were 30 inches in circumference. Today due to weathering, 
rusting, and the once-a-decade steel wire scrubbing by the DCW, the 
cannonballs are only 29.75 in. in circumference. Approximately, when will 
they disappear completely? 
25.3. Calculate the time needed to burn to completion particles of graphite 
(R, = 5 mm, p, = 2.2 gm/cm3, k" = 20 cmlsec) in an 8% oxygen stream. 


=== PDF PAGE 603 ===
Problems 587 
For the high gas velocity used assume that film diffusion does not offer 
any resistance to transfer and reaction. Reaction temperature = 900°C. 
25.4. Spherical particles of zinc blende of size R = 1 mm are roasted in an 8% 
oxygen stream at 900°C and 1 atm. The stoichiometry of the reaction is 
Assuming that reaction proceeds by the shrinking-core model calculate 
the time needed for complete conversion of a particle and the relative 
resistance of ash layer diffusion during this operation. 
Data 
Density of solid, p, = 4.13 gm/cm3 = 0.0425 mol/cm3 
Reaction rate constant, k" = 2 cmlsec 
For gases in the ZnO layer, 9 j e  = 0.08 cm2/sec 
Note that film resistance can safely be neglected as long as a growing ash 
layer is present. 
On doubling the particle size from R to 2R the time for complete conver- 
sion triples. What is the contribution of ash diffusion to the overall resis- 
tance for particles of size 
Spherical solid particles containing B are roasted isothermally in an oven 
with gas of constant composition. Solids are converted to a firm nonflaking 
product according to the SCM as follows: 
From the following conversion data (by chemical analysis) or core size 
data (by slicing and measuring) determine the rate controlling mechanism 
for the transformation of solid. 
25.7. dp , mm 
XB 
t, min 
25.8. d, 
XB 
t, sec 
1 
1 
4 
1 
0.3 
2 
1.5 
1 
6 
1 
0.75 
5 
25.9. dp, mm 
XB 
t, sec 
25.10. d,, 
XB 
t, sec 
1 
1 
200 
2 
0.875 
1 
1.5 
1 
450 
1 
1 
1 


=== PDF PAGE 604 ===
588 
Chapter 25 Fluid-Particle Reactions: Kinetics 
25.11. Uniform-sized spherical particles UO, are reduced to UO, in a uniform 
environment with the following results: 
If reaction follows the SCM, find the controlling mechanism and a rate 
equation to represent this reduction. 
25.12. A large stockpile of coal is burning. Every part of its surface is in flames. 
In a 24-hr period the linear size of the pile, as measured by its silhouette 
against the horizon, seems to decrease by about 5%. 
(a) How should the burning mass decrease in size? 
(b) When should the fire burn itself out? 
(c) State the assumptions on which your estimation is based. 


=== PDF PAGE 605 ===
Chapter 26 
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Three factors control the design of a fluid-solid reactor; the reaction kinetics 
for single particles, the size distribution of solids being treated, and the flow 
patterns of solids and fluid in the reactor. Where the kinetics are complex and 
not well known, where the products of reaction form a blanketing fluid phase, 
where temperature within the system varies greatly from position to position, 
analysis of the situation becomes difficult and present design is based largely on 
the experiences gained by many years of operations, innovation, and small 
changes made on existing reactors. The blast furnace for producing iron is proba- 
bly the most important industrial example of such a system. 
Though some real industrial reactions may never yield to simple analysis, this 
should not deter us from studying idealized systems. These satisfactorily represent 
many real systems and in addition may be taken as the starting point for more 
involved analyses. Here we consider only the greatly simplified idealized systems 
in which the reaction kinetics, flow characteristics, and size distribution of solids 
are known. 
Referring to Fig. 26.1, let us discuss briefly the various types of contacting in 
gas-solid operations. 
Solids and Gas Both in Plug Flow. When solids and gas pass through the 
reactor in plug flow, their compositions change during passage. In addition, such 
operations are usually nonisothermal. 
The plug flow contacting of phases may be accomplished in many ways: by 
countercurrent flow as in blast furnaces and cement kilns [Fig. 26.l(a)], by cross- 
flow as in moving belt feeders for furnaces [Fig. 26.l(b)], or by cocurrent flow 
as in polymer driers [Fig. 26.l(c)]. 
Solids in Mixed Flow. The fluidized bed [Fig. 26.l(d)] is the best example of 
a reactor with mixed flow of solids. The gas flow in such reactors is difficult to 
characterize and often is worse than mixed flow. Because of the high heat capacity 
of the solids, isothermal conditions can frequently be assumed in such operations. 
Semibatch Operations. The ion exchange column of Fig. 26.l(e) is an example 
of the batch treatment of solids in which the flow of fluid closely approximates 


=== PDF PAGE 606 ===
590 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Air 
(a) Blast furnace 
a- 
Air 
(b) Moving feeder for 
coal furnaces 
Hot gas 
t 
Product 
(c) Rotary dryer for heat-sensitive materials 
Fluid in 
Solids in 
Bed of 
solids 
Fluid out 
(d) Fluidized-bed reactor 
(e) Ion exchange bed 
Figure 26.1 Various contacting patterns in fluid-solid reactors: (a-d) 
countercurrent, crosscurrent, and cocurrent plug flow; ( d )  intermediate 
gas flow, mixed solid flow; (e) semibatch operations. 
the ideal of plug flow. On the contrary, an ordinary home fireplace, another 
semibatch operation, has a flow which is difficult to characterize. 
Batch Operations. The reaction and dissolution of a batch of solid in a batch of 
fluid, such as the acid attack of a solid, is a common example of batch operations. 
Analysis and design of fluid-solid systems are greatly simplified if the composi- 


=== PDF PAGE 607 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 591 
tion of the fluid can be considered to be uniform throughout the reactor. Since 
this is a reasonable approximation where fractional conversion of fluid-phase 
reactants is not too great, where fluid backmixing is considerable, or where 
solids wander about the reactor, sampling all the fluid as in fluidized beds, this 
assumption frequently can be used without deviating too greatly from reality. 
We use this assumption in the analyses that follow. 
We then conclude this chapter with a brief treatment of extremely fast reactions 
which are representative of some combustions. Here the analysis simplifies con- 
siderably, since the kinetics do not enter the picture. 
Let us now turn to a number of frequently met contacting patterns, and let 
us develop their performance equations, employing in every case the assumptions 
of uniform gas composition within the reactor. 
Particles of a Single Size, Plug Flow of Solids, Uniform Gas Composition 
The contact time or reaction time needed for any specific conversion of solid is 
found directly from the equations of Table 25.1. 
Mixture of Particles of Different but Unchanging Sizes, Plug Flow of Solids, 
Uniform Gas Composition 
Consider a solid feed consisting of a mixture of different-size particles. The size 
distribution of this feed can be represented either as a continuous distribution 
or as a discrete distribution. We use the latter representation because screen 
analysis, our way of measuring size distributions, gives discrete measurements. 
Let F be the quantity of solid being treated in unit time. Since the density of 
solid may change during reaction, F is defined as the volumetric feed rate of 
solid in the general case. Where density change of the solid is negligible, F can 
represent the mass feed rate of solid as well. In addition, let F(R,) be the quantity 
of material of size about Ri fed to the reactor. If R, is the largest particle size 
in the feed, we have for particles of unchanging size 
Figure 26.2 shows the general characteristics of a discrete size distribution. 
When in plug flow all solids stay in the reactor for the same length of time t,. 
From this and the kinetics for whatever resistance controls, the conversion XB(Ri) 
for any size of particle Ri can be found. Then the mean conversion xB 
of the 
solids leaving the reactor can be obtained by properly summing to find the overall 
contribution to conversion of all sizes of particles. Thus, 
mean value for 
fraction of reactant 
fraction of 
(the fraction of) = 2. ( B unconverted in 
feed which is 
(1) 
I3 unconverted 
allsizes 
particles of size Ri )( of size Ri ) 


=== PDF PAGE 608 ===
592 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
&- 4 
Rm 
Shaded area is feed 
Total feed: 
size 
(any size) 
Size of particles in the feed 
Figure 26.2 Representation of the feed rate of a mixture 
of particles. 
or in symbols 
where R(t, = T) is the radius of the largest particle completely converted in 
the reactor. 
Equation 2 requires some discussion. First of all, we know that a smaller 
particle requires a shorter time for complete conversion. Hence some of our 
feed particles, those smaller than R(tp = T), will be completely reacted. But if 
we automatically apply our conversion-time equations to these particles we 
can come up with X, values greater than unity, which makes no sense physi- 
cally. Thus the lower limit of the summation indicates that particles smaller 
than R(tp = T) are completely converted and do not contribute to the fraction 
unconverted, 1 - zB. 
CONVERSION OF A SIZE MIXTURE IN PLUG FLOW 
I 
A feed consisting 
30% of 50-pm-radius particles 
40% of 100-pm-radius particles 
30% of 200-pm-radius particles 
is to be fed continuously in a thin layer onto a moving grate crosscurrent to a 
flow of reactant gas. For the planned operating conditions the time required for 
complete conversion is 5, 10, and 20 min for the three sizes of particles. Find 


=== PDF PAGE 609 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Desiga 593 
Solid B 
100 >m - 40% 
( 200 pm - 30% 
I 
t,, = 8 min 
t 
Figure E26.1 
the conversion of solids on the grate for a residence time of 8 min in the reactor 
(see Fig. E26.1). 
From the statement of the problem we may consider the solids to be in plug 
flow with t, = 8 min and the gas to be uniform in composition. Hence for a 
mixed feed Eq. 2 is applicable, or 
1 - XB = [I - XB(50 pm)] 
F(100 ~ m )  
+ .. . 
F(50pm)+[1-XB(100pm)] 
F 
and ~ ( 5 0  
pm) = 5 rnin 
F(lOO pm) = 0.40 and ~(100 
pm) = 10 min 
F 
F(200 
= 0.30 and ~(200 
pm) = 20 rnin 
F 
Because for the three sizes of particles 
Rl: R,: R, = T ~ :  
T ~ :  
T ~ ,  
we see from Eq. 25.38 that chemical reaction controls and the conversion-time 
characteristics for each size is given by Eq. 25.23 or 


=== PDF PAGE 610 ===
594 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
I 
Replacing in Eq. (i) we obtain for unconverted reactant 
------------- ----------- 
for R = 100 pm 
for R = 200 pm 
I 
Hence the fraction of solid converted equals 93.2%. 
I 
Note that the smallest size of particles is completely converted and does not 
contribute to the summation of Eq. (i). 
Mixed Flow of Particles of a Single Unchanging Size, Uniform Gas Composition 
Consider the reactor of Fig. 26.l(d) with constant flow rates of both solids and 
gas into and out of the reactor. With the assumption of uniform gas concentration 
and mixed flow of solids, this model represents a fluidized-bed reactor in which 
there is no elutriation of fine particles. 
The conversion of reactant in a single particle depends on its length of stay 
in the bed, and its appropriate controlling resistance is given by Eq. 25.11,25.18, 
or 25.23. However, the length of stay is not the same for all the particles in the 
reactor; hence we must calculate a mean conversion zB 
of material. Recognizing 
that the solid behaves as a macrofluid, this can be done by the methods leading 
to Eq. 11.13. Thus, for the solids leaving the reactor 
fraction of reactant 
fraction of exit 
= ,i [ unconvertedfor ][ s t r ; ~ z l : I I (  
particles staying in 
stayed in the reactor 
(3) 
B unconverted 
particles 
the reactor for time 
for a time between 
ages 
between t and t + dt 
or in symbols 
1 - XB = Jm ( 1  - XB)E dt, 
XB 5 1 
0 
or 
(4) 
1 - XB = J T  (1 - XB)E dt 
0 
where E is the exit age distribution of the solids in the reactor (see Chapter 11). 
For mixed flow of solids with mean residence time 2 in the reactor, see Fig. 
26.3, we find from Fig. 11.14 or Eq. 14.1 that 


=== PDF PAGE 611 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 595 
CA, out 
t 
lo 
as seen by 
the solids 
Solids in 
mixed flow 
I 
(fluidized) 
I t 
Figure 26.3 Conversion of one size of solids in 
mixed flow. 
Thus, for mixed flow of the single size of solid which is completely converted in 
time T, we obtain 
This expression may be integrated for the various controlling resistances. 
For film resistance controlling, Eq. 25.11 with Eq. 6 yields 
which on integration by parts gives 
- 
- t 
XB = - (1 - e~li) 
7 
or in equivalent expanded form, useful for large ?IT, thus for 
very high conversion 
(8b) 
For chemical reaction controlling, Eq. 25.23 replaced in Eq. 6 gives 


=== PDF PAGE 612 ===
596 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Integrating by parts using the recursion formula, found in any table of integrals, 
we obtain 
t 
-
6
 
- + 6  - 
B -  
7 
- (3' (3' 
or in equivalent form, useful for large 717, or for very high 
conversion 
For ash resistance controlling replacement of Eq. 25.18 in Eq. 6 followed by 
integration leads to a cumbersome expression which on expansion yields [see 
Yagi and Kunii (1961)l 
Figure 26.4 Mean conversion versus mean residence time 
in mixed flow reactors, single size of solid. 


=== PDF PAGE 613 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 597 
50 
Gas f ~ l m  
res~stance controls, Eqs 25 11 and 8 
React~on controls, Eqs. 25.23 and 10 
10 
P g 
$/a 
II 
'"I3 5 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I
.
.
/
 
0.01 
0.05 
0 1 
0.5 
1 .O 
1 -x, 
Figure 26.5 Comparison of holding times needed to effect a given conver- 
sion for mixed flow and plug flow of a single size of solid. 
- 
1-x 
I I l9 (IT 
_ 
+- 4iio (;r - 0.00149 (;r + a . a 
B - 5 t  
420 t 
Figures 26.4 and 26.5 present these results for solids in mixed flow in convenient 
graphical form. Figure 26.5 shows clearly that at high conversion the mixed 
flow reactor requires a much larger holding time for solids than does a plug 
flow reactor. 
Extension to multistage operations is not difficult; see Levenspiel (1996, p. 
52.14) or Kunii and Levenspiel (1991). 
CONVERSION OF A SINGLE-SIZED FEED IN A MIXED 
FLOW REACTOR 
I 
Yagi et al. (1951) roasted pyrrhotite (iron sulfide) particles dispersed in asbestos 
fibers and found that the time for complete conversion was related to particle 
size as follows: 
Particles remained as hard solids of unchanging size during reaction. 
A fluidized-bed reactor is planned to convert pyrrhotite ore to the correspond- 
ing oxide. The feed is to be uniform in size, I = 20 min, with mean residence 


=== PDF PAGE 614 ===
598 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
time 7 = 60 min in the reactor. What fraction of original sulfide ore remains un- 
converted? 
Since a hard product material is formed during reaction, film diffusion can be 
ruled out as the controlling resistance. For chemical reaction controlling Eq. 
25.38 shows that 
I 
whereas for ash layer diffusion controlling Eq. 25.37 shows that 
As the experimentally found diameter dependency lies between these two values, 
it is reasonable to expect that both these mechanisms offer resistance to conver- 
sion. Using in turn ash diffusion and chemical reaction as the controlling resis- 
tance should then give the upper and lower bound to the conversion expected. 
The solids in a fluidized bed approximate mixed flow; hence, for chemical 
reaction controlling, Eq. 10, with 717 = 20 min160 min = i, gives 
For ash layer diffusion controlling Eq. 11 gives 
Hence the fraction of sulfide remaining is between 6.2% and 7.8%, or on averaging 
Mixed Flow of a Size Mixture of Particles of Unchanging Size, 
Uniform Gas Composition 
Often a range of particle sizes is used as feed to a mixed flow reactor. For such 
a feed and a single-exit stream (no elutriation of the fines) the methods leading 
to Eqs. 2 and 6, when combined, should yield the required conversion. 
Consider the reactor shown in Fig. 26.6. Since the exit stream is representative 
of the bed conditions, the size distributions of the bed as well as the feed and 
exit streams are all alike, or 


=== PDF PAGE 615 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 599 
Fluidized bed: W, yB 
,- ' ' ? -.. -, 
S O ~ I ~ S  
~ n :  
F, XB = 0 
,? 1-,-. 
*- 
, 
Solids out: F, 
R 
Gas 
R 
Figure 26.6 Fluidized bed with single exit stream treating a size 
mixture of solids. Note that the size distribution of the flow streams 
and the bed are all the same. 
where Wis the quantity of material in the reactor and where W(R,) is the quantity 
of material of size Ri in the reactor. In addition, for this flow the mean residence 
time 7(Ri) of material of any size Ri is equal to the mean residence time of solid 
in the bed, or 
- - 
W 
weight of all solids in the reactor) 
t=t(R.)=-= 
( 
9 
(feed rate of all solids to the reactor) 
(13) 
Letting X,(R,) be the mean conversion of particles of size Ri in the bed, we have 
from Eq. 6 
However, the feed consists of particles of different sizes; hence the overall mean 
of B unconverted in all these sizes is 
mean value for 
fraction of exit or 
fraction unconverted 
entering stream consisting 
in particles of size Ri 
unconverted 
of particles of size Ri 
or in symbols 


=== PDF PAGE 616 ===
600 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Combining Eqs. 14 and 15 and replacing the first term expression with Eqs. 
8,10, or 11 for each size of particle, we obtain in turn, forfilm diffusion controlling, 
for chemical reaction controlling, 
for ash diffusion controlling, 
where 7(Ri) is the time for complete reaction of particles of size Ri. The following 
example illustrates the use of these expressions. 
CONVERSION OF A FEED MIXTURE IN A MIXED 
FLOW REACTOR 
I 
A feed consisting 
30% of 50-pm-radius particles 
40% of 100-pm-radius particles 
30% of 200-pm-radius particles 
is to be reacted in a fluidized-bed steady-state flow reactor constructed from a 
vertical 2-m long 20-cm ID pipe. The fluidizing gas is the gas-phase reactant, and 
at the planned operating conditions the time required for complete conversion is 
5,10, and 20 min for the three sizes of feed. Find the conversion of solids in the 
reactor for a feed rate of 1 kg solidslmin if the bed contains 10 kg solids. 
Additional Information: 
The solids are hard and unchanged in size and weight during reaction. 
A cyclone separator is used to separate and return to the bed any solids that 
may be entrained by the gas. 
The change in gas-phase composition in the bed is small. 
From the statement of the problem we may consider the solids to be in mixed 
flow. For a feed mixture Eq. 15 is applicable, and since chemical reaction controls 
(see Example 26.1), this equation reduces to Eq. 17, where from the problem 


=== PDF PAGE 617 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 601 
statement 
F = 1000 gmlmin 
- 
W 
10 000 gm = 
min 
t = - =  
W = 10 000 gm 
F 
1000 gmlmin 
F(50 pm) = 300 gmlmin 
and 
~ ( 5 0  
pm) = 5 min 
F(100 pm) = 400 gmlmin 
and 
~(100 
pm) = 10 min 
F(200 pm) = 300 gmlmin 
and 
~(200 
pm) = 20 min 
Replacing in Eq. 17 we obtain 
= 
[I 5min 
1 (L)~+. 
. .] 
1-x - ---- 
300 gmlmin 
B -  
4lOmin 
20 10 
1000 gmlmin 
for R = 50 pm 
[ ~ ( l o m i n )  1 (lo)'+. 
+ - - 
-- 
4 10min 
20 10 
1000 
for R = 100 pm 
[I (20 min) 
1 (20)~ 
+ . . .] joo 
+ - - 
-- 
4 10min 
20 10 
1000 
for R = 200 pm 
I 
The mean conversion of solids is then 
FINDING THE SIZE OF A FLUIDIZED BED 
In a gas-phase environment, particles of B are converted to solid product as 
follows: 
Reaction proceeds according to the shrinking core model with reaction control 
and with time for complete conversion of particles of 1 hr. 
A fluidized bed is to be designed to treat 1 tonlhr of solids to 90% conversion 
using a stoichiometric feed rate of A, fed at C,,. 
Find the weight of solids in 


=== PDF PAGE 618 ===
602 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Note: The gas in the 
is not at CAO 
bed 
'x 
' 
Gas at CAO 
Figure E26.4 
the reactor if gas is assumed to be in mixed flow. Note that the gas in the reactor 
is not at C,,. 
Figure E26.4 sketches this problem. 
SOLUTION 
In a CA, environment with reaction controlling 
1 
and in any other environment T cc - 
c*o 
Now for equal stoichiometric feed XA = F B .  Thus, the leaving gas is at 0.1 CAo. 
Since the gas is in mixed flow, the solids see this exit gas, or T = 10 hr. 
From Eq. 10 let us find TI? which gives 
= 0.9. Thus, solve 
Solving by trial and error we find 
Thus, the needed weight of bed is 
W = iFB, = 23(1) = 23 tons 


=== PDF PAGE 619 ===
Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 603 
Instantaneous Reaction 
When reaction between gas and solid is fast enough so that any volume element 
of reactor contains only one or other of the two reactants, but not both, then 
we may consider reaction to be instantaneous. This extreme is approached in 
the high temperature combustion of finely divided solids. 
In this situation prediction of the performance of the reactor is straightforward 
and is dependent only on the stoichiometry of the reaction. The kinetics do 
not enter the picture. Let us illustrate this behavior with the following ideal 
contacting patterns. 
Batch Solids. Figure 26.7 shows two situations, one which represents a packed 
bed, the other a fluidized bed with no bypassing of gas in the form of large gas 
bubbles. In both cases the leaving gas is completely converted and remains that 
way so long as solid reactant is still present in the bed. As soon as the solids are 
all consumed, and this occurs the instant the stoichiometric quantity of gas has 
been added, then the conversion of gas drops to zero. 
Countercurrent Plug Flow of Gas and Solids. Since only one or other reactant 
can be present at any level in the bed, there will be a sharp reaction plane where 
the reactants meet. This will occur either at one end or the other of the reactor 
depending on which feed stream is in excess of stoichiometric. Assuming that 
each 100 moles of solid combine with 100 moles of gas, Figs. 26.8~ and b show 
what happens when we feed a little less gas than stoichiometric and a little more 
than stoichiometric. 
We may wish reaction to occur in the center of the bed so that both ends can 
be used as heat exchange regions to heat up reactants. This can be done by 
matching the gas and solids flow rates; however, this is inherently an unstable 
system and requires proper control. A second alternative, shown in Fig. 26.8c, 
Completely 
converted gas 
Unconverted 
solids 
Cornpletley 
converted 
solids 
Moving 
Suspended 
reaction 
solids 
front 
Completely 
converted gas 
Progressive 
conversion of 
solids with tlrne 
Sollds are 
, 
,. 
un~forrnly 
rnlxed 
I 
Gas 
Gas 
Figure 26.7 A batch of solids contacted with gas; instantaneous reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 620 ===
604 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
Solids in: FBo = 100 
Solids in: FBo = 100 
- Reaction 
zone 
Completely 
converted 
solids 
Solids in: FBo = 100 
I 
Gas in: FAO 
= 99 
Gas in: FAO 
= 101 
Gas in: FAo 
= 1 0 1  
(4 
(6) 
(c) 
Figure 26.8 In countercurrent flow the location of the reaction zone depends on 
which component is in excess of stoichiometric. 
introduces a slight excess of gas at the bottom of the bed, and then removes a 
bit more than this excess at the point where reaction is to occur. 
Moving bed reactors for oil recovery from shale is one example of this kind of 
operation. Another somewhat analogous operation is the multistage counterflow 
reactor, and the four- or five-stage fluidized calciner is a good example of this. 
In all these operations the efficiency of heat utilization is the main concern. 
Cocurrent and Crosscurrent Plug Flow of Gas and Solids. In cocurrent flow, 
shown in Fig. 26.9a, all reaction occurs at the feed end, and this represents a 
poor method of contacting with regard to efficiency of heat utilization and pre- 
heating of entering materials. 
For crosscurrent flow, shown in Fig. 26.9b, there will be a definite reaction 
plane in the solids whose angle depends solely on the stoichiometry and the 
relative feed rate of reactants. In practice, heat transfer characteristics may 
somewhat modify the angle of this plane. 
Mixed Flow of Solids and Gas. Again in the ideal situation either gas or solid will 
be completely converted in the reactor depending on which stream is in excess. 
Extensions 
Modifications and extensions of the methods presented here, for example, 
to more complicated particle kinetics 
to growing and shrinking particles in single reactors and in solid circula- 
tion systems 
to changing gas composition in a single reactor and from stage to stage in 
multistage operations 
to deviations from ideal plug and mixed flow 
to elutriation of fines from a reactor 
are treated elsewhere: see Kunii and Levenspiel (l991), and Levenspiel (1996). 


=== PDF PAGE 621 ===
Problems 605 
S o l i d s , ~  
Gas 
Completely 
Unreacted 
converted gas 
gas 
R?;;;n 
t 
Gas in 
t 
t 
Gas in 
Figure 26.9 Cocurrent and crosscurrent contacting of gas-solids; instantaneous re- 
action. 
Arbitrary Flow of Solids. Since particles flow as macrofluids, their mean conver- 
sion is given by Eq. 11.13. Thus with any RTD and with known gas composition 
we have 
1 - B 
= J (1 - s
i
n
e
 s
o
 dt 
particle stream 
where 1 - X, is given by Eq. 25.23 for SCMIreaction control, and by Eq. 25.18 
for SCMIash diffusion control. 
REFERENCES 
Kunii, D., and Levenspiel, O., Fluidization Engineering, Second edition, Butterworth, 
Boston, MA, 1991. 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR 97339,1996. 
Yagi, S., and Kunii, D., Chem. Eng. Sci., 16, 364, 372, 380 (1961). 
, 
Takagi, K., and Shimoyama, S., J. Chem. Soc. (Japan), Znd. Chem. Sec., 
54, 1 (1951). 
PROBLEMS 
A stream of particles of one size are 80% converted (SCMIash diffusion control, 
uniform gas environment) on passing through a reactor. If the reactor is made 
twice the size but with the same gas environment, same feed rate, and same flow 
pattern of solids, what would be the conversion of solids? The solids are in 
26.1. plug flow. 
26.2. mixed flow. 


=== PDF PAGE 622 ===
606 
Chapter 26 Fluid-Particle Reactors: Design 
A solid feed consisting of 
20 wt% of 1-mm particles and smaller 
30 wt% of 2-mm particles 
50 wt% of 4-mm particles 
passes through a rotating tubular reactor somewhat like a cement kiln 
where it reacts with gas to give a hard nonfriable solid product (SCMI 
reaction control, T = 4 h for 4-mm particles). 
26.3. Find the residence time needed for 100% conversion of solids. 
26.4. Find the mean conversion of the solids for a residence time of 15 min. 
26.5. Particles of uniform size are 60% converted on the average (shrinking 
core model with reaction controlling) when flowing through a single fluid- 
ized bed. If the reactor is made twice as large but contains the same 
amount of solids and with the same gas environment what would be the 
conversion of solids? 
26.6. Solids of unchanging size, R = 0.3 mm, are reacted with gas in a steady 
flow bench scale fluidized reactor with the following result. 
F, = 10 gmlsec, W = 1000 gm, X, = 0.75 
Also, the conversion is strongly temperature-sensitive suggesting that the 
reaction step is rate-controlling. Design a commercial sized fluidized bed 
reactor (find W) to treat 4 metric tonslhr of solid feed of size R = 0.3 
mm to 98% conversion. 
26.7. Solve Example 26.3 with the following modification: the kinetics of the 
reaction is ash diffusion controlled with T(R = 100 ~ m )  
= 10 min. 
26.8. Repeat Example 26.4 if twice the stoichiometric ratio of gas to solid, still 
at C,,, 
is fed to the reactor. 
26.9. Repeat Example 26.4 if the gas is assumed to pass in plug flow through 
the reactor. 
26.10. Consider the following process for converting waste shredded fibers into 
a useful product. Fibers and fluid are fed continuously into a mixed flow 
reactor where they react according to the shrinking core model with the 
reaction step as rate controlling. Develop the performance expression for 
this operation as a function of the pertinent parameters and ignore elutri- 
ation. 


=== PDF PAGE 623 ===
Problems 607 
Hydrogen sulfide is removed from coal gas by passing the gas through a 
moving bed or iron oxide particles. In the coal gas environment (consider 
uniform) the solids are converted from Fe203 to FeS by the SCMIreaction 
control, 7 = 1 hr. Find the fractional conversion of oxide to iron sulfide 
if the RTD of solids in the reactor is approximated by the E curves of 
Figs. P26.11-P26.14. 
E 
E 
E 
t 
t 
0 
t 
90 rnin 
15 
45 rnin 
30 
90 rnin 
Figures P26.11-P26.14 


=== PDF PAGE 624 ===


=== PDF PAGE 625 ===
Biochemical Reaction Systems 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 1611 
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation-Introduction 
and Overall Picture 1623 
Chapter 29 Substrate Limiting Microbial Fermentation 1630 
Chapter 30 Product Limiting Microbial Fermentation 1645 


=== PDF PAGE 626 ===


=== PDF PAGE 627 ===
Chapter 27 
Enzyme Fermentation 
The term "fermentation" can be used in its original strict meaning (to produce 
alcohol from sugar-nothing 
else) or it can be used more or less broadly. We 
will use the modern broad definition: 
From the simplest to the most complex, biological processes may be classed 
as fermentations, elementary physiological processes, and the action of living 
entities. Further, fermentations can be divided into two broad groups: those 
promoted and catalyzed by microorganisms or microbes (yeasts, bacteria, 
algae, molds, protozoa) and those promoted by enzymes (chemicals pro- 
duced by microorganisms). In general, fermentations are reactions wherein 
a raw organic feed is converted into product by the action of microbes or 
by the action of enzymes. 
This whole classification is shown in Fig. 27.1. 
Enzyme fermentations can be represented by 
enzyme E 
(organic feed, A) - 
(product chemical, R) 
Microbial fermentations can be represented by 
microbe C 
(organic feed, A) which acb as catalys: (product, R) + (more cells, C) 
(2) 
The key distinction between these two types of fermentation is that in enzyme 
fermentation the catalytic agent, the enzyme, does not reproduce itself, but acts 
as an ordinary chemical, while in microbial fermentation the catalytic agent, the 
611 


=== PDF PAGE 628 ===
612 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
Classification: 
Action of living 
processes 
I 
I- 
entities 
Fermentation 
Elementary physiological 
. .  . 
J \ 
processes 
Y 
Catalvsed bv ENZYMES 
Catalvsed by microorgansrns, 
-high molecular weight 
(MICROBES or CELLS) 
compounds, whichBre 
-yeasts 
- molds 
very specific, and usually 
- bacteria - protozoa 
only act on one compound 
- algae 
Figure 27.1 Classification of biological processes. 
cell or microbe, reproduces itself. Within the cells it is the enzyme which catalyses 
the reaction, just as in enzyme fermentation; however, in reproducing itself the 
cell manufactures its own enzyme. 
In this chapter we introduce enzyme fermentations, in the following chapters 
we take up microbial fermentations. 
27.1 MICHAELIS-MENTEN KINETICS (M-M KINETICS) 
In a sympathetic environment, with just the right enzyme for catalyst, organic 
A will react to produce R. Observations show the behavior of Fig. 27.2. 
A simple expression which accounts for this behavior is 
a constant. called the Michaelis constant 
High CEO 
At high CA: The rate is independent 
AAR~F 
+ 
of CA 
At low CA: Rate 
CA, hence the 
rate is 1st order with 
respect to CA. 
Low CEO 
At all CA: The rate is proportional 
to CEO, the enzyme 
concentration 
CA 
Figure 27.2 Typical rate-concentration curves for enzyme catalyzed reactions. 


=== PDF PAGE 629 ===
27.1 Michaelis-Menten 
Kinetics (M-M 
Kinetics) 613 
Figure 27.3 Special features of the M-M equation, Eq. 3. 
Rate: - r ~  
= r~ 
[First 
order behavior 
A 
when CA << CM 
Zero order behavior 
In searching for the simplest mechanism to explain these observations and this 
rate form, Michaelis and Menten (1913) came up with the two-step elementary 
reaction mechanism 
rmax= k3CE0 
rfree enzyme 
/ 
------- L ------------ ------ 
/I 
J 
'" 
3 
\ 
X--R + E ... and ... CEO = CE + CX 
A+E+/ 
/" 
I 
Rate-concentration curve 
for Michaelis-Menten 
At CA = CM half the 
kinetics 
* CA 
k2 + k3 
C A = C M = -  
kl 
Lintermediate 
\total enzyme cenzyme attached 
to reactant 
Example 2.2 develops and explains the relationship between the above mecha- 
nism and rate equation. Let us look at some of the special features of the 
Michaelis-Menten equation. 
when CA = C, half the enzyme is in free form, the other half combined. 
when CA 9 C, most of the enzyme is tied up as complex X. 
when CA < C, most of the enzyme is in free form. 
Graphically we show this equation in Fig. 27.3. 
Next let us see how to evaluate the two rate constants of this important enzyme 
fermentation equation. 
Batch or Plug Flow Fermentor 
For this system, integration of the M-M equation gives [see Eq. 3.57 or see 
Michaelis and Menten (1913)l 
first-order term zero-order term 
This concentration-time behavior is shown in Fig. 27.4. 


=== PDF PAGE 630 ===
614 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
CA 
Zero-order is approached 
0 - 
* 
0 
Figure 27.4 Concentration-time behavior of the 
M-M equation. 
Unfortunately this equation cannot be plotted directly to find the values of 
the constants k3 and C,. However, by manipulation we find the following form 
which can be plotted, as shown in Fig. 27.5, to give the rate constants 
Mixed Flow Fermentor 
Inserting the M-M equation into the mixed flow performance expression gives 
Unfortunately we cannot devise a plot of this equation to give k3 and C,. 
However, on rearrangement we find an equation form which does allow a direct 
evaluation of k3 and CM, or 
In graphical form this gives (see Fig. 27.6). 
Alternative Methods for Evaluating k and C, 
Biologists and life scientists have developed a tradition of fitting and extracting 
the rate constants of the M-M equation with a multistep procedure, as follows 


=== PDF PAGE 631 ===
27.1 Michaelis-Menten 
Kinetics (M-M 
Kinetics) 615 
A 
c ~ O  - c~ 
I 
I , 
? 
C E O ~  
CM + CAo 
In CAolCA 
k3 
- C ~  
This plot gives one 
line for all CEO 
I 
for each CEO 
Figure 27.5 Either plot can be used to test and fit the M-M equation (Eq. 6) from batch reactor data. 
first measure CAOut versus r for data taken in any one of the three ideal 
reactors-batch, 
mixed, or plug flow. 
then evaluate -rA at various CA, either directly from mixed flow data 
(-r, = (C,, - CAout)/r) 
or by taking slopes for the plug flow or batch data, 
as shown in Chapter 3. 
plot CA versus (-r,) in one of two ways 
(-r,) versus (-rA)/CA 
. . . the Eadie plot 
l/(-rA) versus l / C A  
. . . the Lineweaver plot 
and from these plots extract C, and k. 
The CRE method which leads to Eq. 6 or Eq. 8 fits the measured CA versus 
r data from any of the three ideal reactor types, is direct, is less prone to fiddling, 
and is more reliable. 


=== PDF PAGE 632 ===
616 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
One line for all CEO 
Separate line 
for each CEO 
Figure 27.6 Either plot can be used to test and fit the M-M equation (Eq. 8) using data 
taken in a mixed-flow reactor. 
27.2 INHIBITION BY A FOREIGN SUBSTANCE-COMPETITIVE AND 
NONCOMPETITIVE INHIBITION 
When the presence of substance B causes the slowdown of the enzyme-substrate 
reaction of A to R, then B is called an inhibitor. We have various kinds of 
inhibitor action, the simplest models being called competitive and noncompetitive. 
We have competitive inhibition when A and B attack the same site on the 
enzyme. We have noncompetitive inhibition when B attacks a different site on 
the enzyme, but in doing so stops the action of A. In simple pictures this action 
is shown in Fig. 27.7. 
Pharmacological significance: the study of enzymes and inhibition is one of 
the major methods in determining the action of existing drugs and in developing 
new drugs. This approach has changed the whole direction of pharmacological 
research in recent years. The main thrust today is 
to study the disease biochemically, then 
synthesize a chemical to block the action of a crucial enzyme. 
Let us develop kinetic expressions for these two types of inhibition. 


=== PDF PAGE 633 ===
27.2 Inhibition by a Foreign Substance 617 
Note: when B 1s on 
the surface ~t w ~ l l  
not let A enter 
or leave 
Compet~t~ve 
Noncompef~t~ve 
l n h ~ b ~ t ~ o n  
~nh~bltlon 1 
Figure 27.7 A simple representation of the action of two types of inhibitors. 
Kinetics of Competitive Inhibition 
With A and B competing for the same site on the enzyme we have the follow- 
ing mechanism: 
Cnote that B only attacks the free enzyme 
With a procedure as shown in Chapter 2 (see Example 2.2) we end up with the 
following rate equation: 
- 
r, = 
k3 c ~ o c ~  
- 
- 
k3 
C~ 
cM + cA + NCBoCM CM(l + NCBo) + CA 
k2 + k3 mol 
CM = ---- -- 
kl ' m3 
where 
N = -  - 
k5 ' mol 
Compared to systems without inhibition (Eq. 3) we see that all we need do here 
is replace CM by CM(l + NCBo). 
Kinetics of Noncompetitive Inhibition 
Here A attacks one site on the enzyme, B attacks a different site, but in doing 
so it stops the action of A. The mechanism of this action is represented by 


=== PDF PAGE 634 ===
618 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
Note that B attacks the enzyme irrespective of whether A is attached to it or 
not. The overall rate is then 
Compared to enzyme reactions without inhibition we see that both k3 and CM 
are modified here. Thus, for noncompetitive inhibition, 
replace k b 
k3 
1 + LCBa 
1 + NCBo 
replace C, by C, ( 
) 
1 + LCBo 
How to Tell between Competitive and Noncompetitive 
Inhibition from Experiment 
With C versus t data obtained from either batch, mixed flow or plug flow runs 
make one of the recommended plots for inhibition-free systems (see Fig. 27.5 
or Fig. 27.6). With inhibition these plots are modified as shown in Figs. 27.8 
and 27.9. 
Competitive 
Noncompetitive 
c,, = 0 
Low 
High CBo 
4 
CEO = 0 
Low 
High CEO 
Figure 27.8 Effect of inhibition on batch or plug flow data. 


=== PDF PAGE 635 ===
Problems 619 
Figure 27.9 Effect of inhibition on mixed flow reactor data. 
A 
Competitive 
h 
Noncompetitive 
Comments 
CBO = 0 
LOW High CBO 
The M-M equation is the simplest expression to represent enzyme catalyzed 
reactions. It has been modified and extended in many ways. The two modes of 
inhibition introduced here are the simplest imaginable. Others are more complex 
to represent mathematically, so always try these first. 
CBo = 0 
Low 
High CBo 
REFERENCE 
Michaelis, L., and Menten, M. L., Biochem. Z., 49, 333 (1913). 
0 
C M ( l  + NCBo) 
CM 
C M ( l  + NCBo) 
PROBLEMS 
27.1. Substrate A and enzyme E flow through a mixed flow reactor (V = 6 liter). 
From the entering and leaving concentrations and flow rate find a rate 
equation to represent the action of enzyme on substrate. 
; 
k3 
k3 
/ 
L- 
-CM 
CEO, mollliter 
C,,, mollliter 
C, mollliter 
v, literlhr 
/ k3 
k3 
/ 
L 
-CM 
27.2. At room temperature sucrose is hydrolyzed by the enzyme sucrase as 
follows: 
sucrase 
sucrose -products 


=== PDF PAGE 636 ===
620 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
Starting with sucrose (C,, 
= 1 mol/m3) and sucrase (CEO = 0.01 mol/m3) 
the following data are obtained in a batch reactor (concentrations are 
calculated from optical rotation measurements) 
C,, mol/m3 
0.68 
0.16 
0.006 
t, hr 
2 
6 
10 
Find a rate equation to represent the kinetics of this reaction. 
27.3. In a number of separate runs different concentrations of substrate and 
enzyme are introduced into a batch reactor and allowed to react. After a 
certain time the reaction is quenched and the vessel contents analyzed. 
From the results found below find a rate equation to represent the action 
of enzyme on substrate. 
Run 
c,,, 
m01/m3 
CAo m01/m3 
c,, 
m01/m3 
t, hr 
27.4. Carbohydrate A decomposes in the presence of enzyme E. We also suspect 
that carbohydrate B in some way influences this decomposition. To study 
this phenomenon various concentrations of A, B, and E flow into and out 
of a mixed flow reactor (V = 240 cm3). 
(a) From the following data find a rate equation for the decomposition. 
(b) What can you say about the role of B in the decomposition? 
(c) Can you suggest a mechanism for this reaction? 
27.5. Enzyme E catalyzes the decomposition of substrate A. To see whether 
substance B acts as inhibitor we make two kinetic runs in a batch reactor, 
one with B present, the other without B. From the data recorded below 
(a) Find a rate equation to represent the decomposition of A. 
(b) What is the role of B in this decomposition? 
(c) Suggest a mechanism for the reaction. 


=== PDF PAGE 637 ===
Problems 621 
Run I .  CAo = 600 mol/m3, CEO = 8 gm/m3, no B present 
Run 2. CAo = 800 mol/m3, CEO = 8 gm/m3, CB = CBo = 100 mol/m3 
Cellulose can be converted to sugar by the following enzymatic attack 
cellulase 
cellulase - 
sugar 
and both celluboise and glucose act to inhibit the breakdown. To study 
the kinetics of this reaction a number of runs are made in a mixed flow 
reactor kept at 50°C and using a feed of finely shredded cellulose (CAo = 
25 kg/m3), enzyme (CEO = 0.01 kg/m3, same for all runs), and various 
inhibitors. The results are as follows: 
Series 2 
Series 3 
Series 1 
with Cellobiose 
with Glucose 
Exit Stream 
no Inhibitor 
CBO = 5 kg/m3 
CGo = 10 kg/m3 
Run 
CA, kg/m3 
T, min 
7, min 
T, min 
27.6. Find a rate equation to represent the breakdown of cellulose by cellulase 
in the absence of inhibitor. 
27.7. What is the role of cellubiose in the breakdown of cellulose (find the type 
of inhibition, and rate equation). 
27.8. What is the role of glucose in the breakdown of cellulose (find the type of 
inhibition, and the rate equation). 
The rate data for these problems are modified from Ghose and Das, 
Advances in Biochemical Engineering, 1, 66 (1971). 
27.9. Given the Michaelis-Menten rate form to represent enzyme-substrate reac- 
tions (or catalyst-reactant reaction) 
enzyme 
A-R, 
-rA= 
~ C A C E O  
CA + (constant) 


=== PDF PAGE 638 ===
622 
Chapter 27 Enzyme Fermentation 
which of the following contacting patterns when operated properly gives 
good reactor behavior (close to minimum reactor size) and which will 
not, if the reactor is to be fed two feed streams, one containing C,,, 
the 
other CEO? 


=== PDF PAGE 639 ===
Chapter 28 
Microbial Fermentation- 
Introduction and Overall Picture 
Natural fermentation is a complex situation with a hodge-podge of foods and 
cells all busily reacting. In this introduction let us only consider the very simplest 
of situations: 
one type of microbe C acting. We sometimes call this the cell or bug. 
one type of needed food A. This is called the substrate by life science workers. 
If the food is right the bugs eat it, multiply, and in the process produce waste 
material R. In symbols 
In some cases the presence of product R inhibits the action of the cells, no matter 
how much food is available and we have what is called poisoning by product, 
or product poisoning. Wine making is an example of this 
squished grapes, fruit, buss_ more 
cereals, potatoes, etc. ) 
(bugs) 
+ 
As the concentration of alcohol rises the cells multiply more slowly, and at about 
12% alcohol the bugs quit. Alcohol is the poison here. 
Activated sludge treatment of waste water is an example of a fermentation 
which is free of product poisoning 
organic waste) 
(more) 
+ (breakdown products 
material 
bugs 
CO,H,O, ... 
Sometimes we are interested in the breakdown of A, as in waste water treat- 
ment. In other situations we are interested in producing cells C, as in the growing 
of yeast or single-cell protein for food. In still others we want the cell's waste 
material R, as in the production of penicillin and other antibiotics. 
Let us see what typically happens with a single type of bug and a single food. 
623 


=== PDF PAGE 640 ===
624 
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 
Slope of 
growth 
curve 
Figure 28.1 Cell growth in a uniform friendly environment. 
cco 
In - 
cc 
Constant Environment Fermentation, Qualitative 
Maximum slope, 
:. maximum growth 
High CA, 
:. cells have 
rate of cells, 
k 
more than 
enough food 
* CA 
What happens when we introduce a batch of microbes into a friendly constant 
composition medium having food of concentration C,? First the microbes take 
some time to adapt to their new environment, then they grow exponentially. 
Thus we have the behavior shown in Fig. 28.1. Roughly-the 
time lag is a result 
of the "shock" to the cells in finding themselves in these new surroundings. 
-4 
Time lag k 
- 
LOW cA, 
Here the cells 
thus cells are 
have plenty 
starved for food 
of food 
the growth rate of cells (after the time lag) is given by Monod as 
the concentration o f  A where the cells 
reproduce at 112 their maximum rate 
Batch Fermentor, Qualitative 
Here cells reproduce, the composition of the substrate changes, and product 
which can be toxic to the cells forms. Typically we see 
an induction period (time lag) 
a growth period 
a stationary period and 
a dying of cells 
Stationary 
Cells start 
dying 
Exponential 
Time 


=== PDF PAGE 641 ===
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 625 
Usual form of lag curve 
t 
Other forms of lag curves are 
sometimes observed, for example 
t 
Mature cells have the 
least trouble adapting 
Age of cells introduced into 
Age of cells introduced into 
fresh medium 
fresh medium 
Figure 28.2 The time lag depends on the age of cells. 
A few words follow about these regimes. 
(a) Lag. As the cells in a container use up their food supply they stop multi- 
plying, their enzyme activity decreases, low molecular weight chemicals 
diffuse out, and the cells change character. They age. So when they are 
introduced into a new environment a time lag is observed as the cells 
remanufacture the chemicals needed for growth and reproduction. In gen- 
eral any change in environment results in an induction period as the cells 
adjust. We find, as shown in Fig. 28.2. 
(b) Growth and stationary phase. Cells grow exponentially in a uniform envi- 
ronment, but in a batch system the medium changes so the growth rate 
changes. The eventual drop in cell growth is governed either by 
depletion of food or 
accumulation of toxic materials (toxic to the cell). 
Graphically we summarize this in Fig. 28.3. 
Mixed Flow Fermentor 
Here the cells are in a uniform environment. No adaptation is needed and cell 
multiplication proceeds at a constant rate determined by the composition of the 
fluid in the vessel. This is frequently represented by a Monod-type equation 
The k value depends on all sorts of things: temperature, presence of trace ele- 
ments, vitamins, toxic substances, light intensity, etc. 


=== PDF PAGE 642 ===
626 
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 
Substrate limiting 
Poison limiting 
(final Cc depends on the initial 
(Cc never exceeds a certain value. 
amount of food. Product does 
Product slows and then stops 
not affect the rate) 
the reaction) 
Start with 
t 
much x- 
I 
Rapid 
high CAo 
I 
growth 
/ 
For an initial 
concentration CAO 
in the batch here 
is the maximum 
cell production 
possible 
In general 
Cc, ,,, is independent of CAo 
limits cell growth 
of food is limiting 
* 
Figure 28.3 In a batch reactor the maximum cell production depends on the limiting mechanism. 
Product Distribution and Fractional Yields 
For the stoichiometric equation 
A&C + r~ 
let us use the following shorthand notation for the instantaneous fractional yields 
d(C formed) 
d(R formed) 
@ = '(RIA) = d(A used) 
d(R formed) 
@ = '(R'C) 
= d(C used) 


=== PDF PAGE 643 ===
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 627 
Then we have the following relationships 
and 
In general the stoichiometry can be messy with fractional yields changing with 
composition. Treatment of that case can be difficult. We'd like therefore to make 
the simplification that all cp values remain constant at all compositions. This 
assumption may be reasonable for mixed flow, or for the exponential growth 
period of batch reactors, otherwise it is questionable. 
Let us make this assumption anyway-all 
cp values stay constant. In this case 
for any change we can write 
C
-
C
 
C
A
0
-
C
)
 . or... Cc=Cco+ @(CAO-cAq 
CR-CRo=@(CAo-CA) 
. or... C R = C R O + @ ( C A O - ~ A ) )  
(4) 
CR-CRO= @ (CC-CCO) ... or... CR=CRO+@ 
(CC-CCOd 
Kinetic Expressions 
The rate of cell multiplication depends in general on the availability of food and 
on the build up of wastes which interfere with cell multiplication. The simplest 
reasonable rate forms are shown below. We use these in the following chapters. 
Availability of Food. For a reasonable quantitative expression make the anal- 
ogy with enzyme kinetics. 
For enzymes: 
A + E = X  7 
at high CA 
... rR = kcEO 
7 
and CEO = CE + CX J 
at all CA 
... r - kCE0 CA 
/- 
R-CA+CM 
f 
Michaelis-Menten 
M-M constant 
equation 


=== PDF PAGE 644 ===
628 
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 
For microbes: 
+ 
A + Cresting c Cpregnant 
at high CA 
... r ~ '  kcC 
1 
7 
Cpregnant + 2Cresting + R ) 
at low CA 
.-. r ~  = kcCcA/cM) 
(6) 
Many other kinetic forms have been proposed and have been used in the past; 
however, they have all been forgotten since Monod came out with his expression. 
Its simplicity won the day. So we will use this type of expression throughout to 
relate the rate of cell growth to substrate concentration. 
Effect of Harmful Wastes. As harmful wastes R build up, they interfere with 
cell multiplication. Thus, the observed Monod rate constant kob, decreases with 
rise in C,. A simple form of this relationship is 
kobs = k 1 - , 
order of product poisoning 
\ (  :p 
Lrate constant in the absence 
of harmful waste material 
where Ca is that concentration of R where all cell activity stops, in which case 
kob, becomes zero. This expression is shown in Fig. 28.4. 
k 
Linear decrease in rate 
constant as R builds up 
0 
Concentration of waste where -/ 
all cell activity stops 
Figure 28.4 The observed k decreases as poi- 
sonous product R builds up (see Eq. 7). 


=== PDF PAGE 645 ===
Chapter 28 Microbial Fermentation 629 
General Kinetic Expression. The simplest expression of the Monod type which 
can account for both factors in microbial fermentation is 
r c = - r ~ @ = ~ ~ @ = k  Obs CA + CM 
generalized 
Monod equation 
as CR rises 
... where ... kobs = 
concentration where 
all reaction stops 
In general, then, reaction and cell multiplication will slow down either by deple- 
tion of A (famine) or by build up of R (environmental pollution). 
Planned Treatment of the Subject 
The next two chapters treat in turn the performance expressions and design 
consequences for 
poison-free Monod kinetics. Here food limitation alone affects the growth 
rate of cells. 
product poisoning kinetics. Here some product formed during fermentation 
slows the rate. 
We also assume in these chapters a constant fractional yield throughout, and since 
everything is liquid we take E, = 0, and we will use concentrations throughout. 
More generally, an excess of either substrate or cells in the broth can also 
slow the rate of fermentation. In these situations the Monod equation should 
be suitably modified [see Han and Levenspiel, Biotech. and Bioeng., 32, 430 
(1988), for a discussion and general treatment for all these forms of inhibition]. 


=== PDF PAGE 646 ===
Chapter 29 
Substrate-Limiting 
Microbial Fermentation 
If we assume a constant fractional yield and no slowing of the rate as a result 
of product poisoning or increase in cell crowding in the broth, then the general 
rate equation of the previous chapter, Eq. 28.8, reduces to the well-known Mo- 
nod equation 
rc = @ (-'A) = k C ~  
C~ . where cc - C ,  = @ (cA0 
- cA) (1) 
C A  + CM 
(Monad constant 
and where C,, and C ,  are the feed or starting compositions. 
Let us examine ideal reactors processing feed which is reacting away according 
to these kinetics. 
29.1 BATCH (OR PLUG FLOW) FERMENTORS 
Consider the progress of this reaction. At the start CAO is high, Cc, is low; at the 
end, CA + 0 while C, is high. Thus, the rate at the beginning and at the end of 
a run is low, but it will be high at some intermediate composition. By putting 
drcldt = 0, we find that the maximum rate occurs at 
C ~ ,  
rnax rate = 4 
C& + C
~
(
C
~
~
 
+ @ C
~
~
)
 
- C~ 
What this means is that with a feed C,,, Cco to any system, the key to proper 
design is to use mixed flow to reach C,, ,, ,, all in one step, then use plug flow 
beyond this point. Thus, it is always important to know CA, , ,, . 
630 


=== PDF PAGE 647 ===
29.1 Batch (or Plug Flow) Fermentors 631 
Now let us return to our batch (or plug flow) reactor. Applying its performance 
equation we find 
Integration then gives 
... with Cc - Cco = @ (cAo - cA) 
If a time lag is involved just add t,,, to the above times to find t,,,,,. If we wish 
we can write the performance equation in terms of C, instead of C, and C,. 
Just remember that 
The sketches of Fig. 29.1 show the main properties of this performance equation. 
f"; 
Run out 
I 
of food 
the exponential 
if both CA and Cc 
change appreciably 
during the run 
Figure 29.1 Behavior of batch or plug flow reactors for Monod type microbial fermentation. 


=== PDF PAGE 648 ===
632 Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
Figure 29.2 Evaluation of the Monod equation constants from 
batch data, method (a). 
How to Find the Monod Constants from the Batch Experiment 
Method (a). Rearrange Eq. 3 to give 
Then plot the data as shown in Fig. 29.2 
Method (b). First find rc by taking dCc/dt data, then rearrange the Monod 
equation to give 
Then plot as shown in Fig. 29.3 to find CM and k. 
Figure 29.3 Evaluation of the constants of the Monod 
equation from batch reactor data, method (b). 


=== PDF PAGE 649 ===
29.2 Mixed Flow Ferrnentors 633 
Comments on Batch Operations 
Method (a) uses all the data directly and presents it as a linear plot. This 
method is probably better, all round. 
Method (b) requires taking derivatives or slopes from experimental data, is 
more tedious, and is probably less reliable. 
For high CA, thus C, P CM, put CM = 0 in the Monod equation. This gives 
rc = k c c ,  in which case the performance expression, Eq. 3, simplifies to 
c c  
k~~ = In - ... an exponential growth curve 
cco 
For low C,, thus CA < C,, the Monod equation becomes simple autocata- 
lytic, and the performance expression, Eq. 3, reduces to 
k~~ = 
c~ 
In ------ 
c ~ ~ C c  
... S-shaped growth curve. See the 
CAO + @ Cco 
C ~ C c o  
autocatalytic equation in Chapter 3 
For very high Cc the poison-free Monod equation just can't apply, for even 
if there is plenty enough food the cells will crowd out each other, and growth 
will slow down and will eventually stop. So, for very high cell concentration, 
we must go to product poison kinetics. 
It is awkward to try to evaluate the rate constants of the Monod equation 
from batch or plug flow data. Mixed flow data are so much simpler to 
interpret, as we shall see. 
29.2 MIXED FLOW FERMENTORS 
No Cells in Feed Stream, C,, = 0 
Assume Monod kinetics (no product poisoning), constant fractional yields 9, 
and no cells entering in the feed stream. Then the mixed flow performance 
equation becomes 
A ci 
T,,, = - where 
i = A, C, or R 
Ti 
Figure 29a 


=== PDF PAGE 650 ===
634 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
Replacing r, from Eq. 1 into Eq. 6 then gives 
In terms of CA 
kzm = c~ + c~ 
CM 
... or CA = 
CM 
... for kz, > 1 + - 
c A 
m 
c ~ o  
In terms of Cc 
kz, = @ (c~O + c ~ )  
- c~ 
@ cA0- cC 
CAO 
In terms of CR 
kz, = @ ~ A O  
- CR 
no solution possible 
CM 
if kzm<l+- 
'A0 
This intriguing expression was developed by Monod (1949), and independently, 
at about the same time, by Novick and Szilard (1950). 
To evaluate the kinetic constants from a set of mixed flow runs, rearrange Eq. 
7 to give 
and the plot as shown in Fig. 29.4 
From the performance equation we can show that everything-washout, opti- 
mum processing time, maximum production rate-all 
depend on C, and c,,, 
combined as follows: 


=== PDF PAGE 651 ===
29.2 Mixed Flow Fermentors 635 
Figure 29.4 Evaluating the Monod constants 
from mixed flow reactor data. 
Figure 29.5 Summary of the mixed flow behavior of reactions which follow Monod kinetics. 
A 
, 
. 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
@A$I 
CC, optimum = ---- 
N + l  
CC, optlmum - N 
-- 
C ~ ,  
ma~. possible 
+ ' 
CC,opt -------- 
* k7m 
I I 
Washout occurs here. 
Maximum production rate of cells 
I 
I 
I I 
(maximum rate of everything) 
I I 
occurs here. 
I I 
I I 
I ' 


=== PDF PAGE 652 ===
636 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
Thus, optimum operations of a single mixed flow fermentor occurs when 
(10) 
and washout occurs at 
All this is shown in Fig. 29.5. 
Feed Stream Contains Cells, C,, Z 0 
With both feed and cells entering the fermentor, the Monod expression (Eq. 1) 
in the performance expression for the MFR (Eq. 6) gives 
Examples 29.ld, 29.le and 29.lf use this expression. 
29.3 OPTIMUM OPERATION OF FERMENTORS 
With poison-free Monod kinetics and a given feed, we have a U-shaped llr 
versus C curve, as shown in Fig. 29.6. 
From Chapter 5 we have learned that with this form of rate-concentration 
curve we should operate as follows: 
To reach any point between A and B run part of the feed at A in mixed 
flow and mix with the rest of the feed. 
To reach any point between A and 0 go directly to point A in mixed flow, 
then use plug flow beyond A. 
These two rules represent the key to optimum reactor behavior. 
Figure 29.6 Rate-concentration behav- 
ior of Monod kinetics. 


=== PDF PAGE 653 ===
29.3 Optimum Operation of Fermentors 637 
MIXED REACTORS FOR MONOD KINETICS 
Let us illustrate the above important optimization principle by suggesting how 
to best operate various combinations of mixed flow reactors for a fermentation 
which follows Monod kinetics, and where 
k = 2, CAO = 3, CM = 1. @= 
1 and V = 1 for each reactor 
and all quantities are expressed in consistent units. Consider in turn the follow- 
ing setups 
(a) A single MFR, with a feed rate v = 3 
(b) A single MFR, with v = 1 
(c) A single MFR, with v = 113 
(d) Two MFR, v = 3 
(e) Two MFR, v = 1.5 
(f) Two MFR, v = 0.5 
Do not calculate the outlet concentration of A or C. 
SOLUTION 
Preliminary. From the optimization rules for mixed flow reactions (see Eqs. 9 
and lo), we have 
- 
N2 
rm, washout - (N2 - l ) k  
(a) High Feed Rate, Single Reactor, v = 3. If all the feed goes through the 
MFR the mean residence time r = Vlv = 113 is too short and the cells don't 
stay in the reactor long enough and will wash out. So bypass some of the feed 
and let the reactor operate at its optimum, as shown in Fig. E29.la. 
(b) Intermediate Feed Rate, Single MFR, v = 1. Here if all the feed passes 
through the reactor r = Vlv = 1, which is optimum, so operate that way, see 
Fig. E29.lb. 


=== PDF PAGE 654 ===
638 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
Figure E29.1 
(c) Low Feed Rate, Single Reactor, v = 1/3. Here r = Vlv = ll(113) = 3, 
which is longer than the optimum, so pass everything through the reactor, as 
shown in Fig. E29.1~. 
(d) High Feed Rate, 2 MFR, v = 3. Noting that for each MFR we want r = 
1, which is optimum, we end up with the scheme shown in Fig. E29.ld. 
(e) Intermediate Feed Rate, 2 MFR, v = 1.5. Here the best we can do is keep 
the first reactor at the best conditions, as shown in Fig. E29.le. 
Cf) Low Feed Rate, 2 MFR, v = 0.5. Here the feed rate is too low to keep 
either reactor at the optimum so we end up with the scheme shown in Fig. E29.1 f. 
g PLUG FLOW REACTOR FOR MONOD KINETICS 
Let us extend Example 29.1 to the situation where we use a plug flow reactor 
(PFR) with or without recycle in place of mixed flow reactors (MFR). Find the 
optimum in the following situations. 
I 
(a) The volume of PFR Vp = 3, v = 2 
(b) Vp = 2, v = 3 


=== PDF PAGE 655 ===
29.3 Optimum Operation of Fermentors 639 
First find the optimum conditions 
2 
N = 2 ,  r,,,=l 
and 
7 ,, 
= -  
3 
(a) Low feed rate, T = Vp/v = 3/2 = 1.5. Here two optimal arrangements 
are shown in Fig. E29.2a. 
(b) High feed rate, T = Vp/v = 2/3. If all the feed flows through the reactor 
we will have washout. So the optimum is as shown in Fig. E29.2b. 
Approach mixed flow 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure E29.2 
GLUCOSE FOR E. COLI BACTERIA 
The E. coli microbe grows contentedly on glucose according to Monod kinetics 
as follows: 
40 CACc kg cells 
r - 
C -  CA+0.4 m3.hr with 
kg glucose 
\c*= 
m3 
What feed rate of glucose solution (C,, = 6 kg/m3) to a mixed flow reactor (V = 
1 m3) would give the maximum consumption rate of glucose, and maximum 
production rate of E. coli cells? 


=== PDF PAGE 656 ===
640 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Lirniting Microbial Fermentation 
To find the maximum consumption rate of glucose, first find Nand then use the 
information given in Fig. 29.5. 
I 
The feed rate of glucose is 
The maximum consumption rate of glucose is 
I 
The maximum production rate of E. coli is 
Comments 
The extension of the performance equations developed in this chapter to 
plug flow with recycle of exit fluid 
mixed flow with a feed which contains C,, Z 0 
cell separation, concentration, and recycle 
and additional discussion are found in Levenspiel (1996) Chapter 83. 
The problems which follow quantitatively verify the findings of the first 
two examples. 


=== PDF PAGE 657 ===
Problems 641 
In the literature on continuous fermentation much effort is spent calculating 
what happens in this or that set up. Most of the schemes are nowhere near 
optimum so we do not consider them. 
When the cp values are constant throughout, at high and low conversions, 
then we have just one independent variable to deal with as composition 
changes with time or position. Thus, we can use any one concentration, C,, 
C,, or C, in the performance expression. We can compare performance of 
various reactor types, plug flow, mixed flow, etc. with no difficulty. This is 
what we have done here. 
In general, however, cp = f (C,, C,, C,). And when cp varies with composi- 
tion, then things get more difficult and we cannot directly compare reac- 
tor types. 
In 1939, as part of his thesis, Jacques Monod proposed the equation which 
we use here. The thesis was published as a book in 1948 and was later 
condensed and translated into English in 1949 (see end-of-chapter reference). 
In microbiology they use the terms 
substrate for the feed. 
dilution rate for 117. In chemical engineering, we call this the space 
velocity. Here we use neither term. We use space time 7. 
chemostat, turbidostat for mixed flow reactor. 
We should be aware of the difference in language. 
REFERENCES 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, OR (1996). 
Monod J., Ann. Reu. Microbiology, 3, 371 (1949) 
, 
Annales de l'lnstitut Pasteur, 79, 390 (1950). Recherches sur la Croissance des 
Cultures Bacteriennes, Second ed., Herman, Paris, 1958. 
Novick, A., and Szilard, L., Proc. N.A.S., Washington, 36, 708 (1950). 
PROBLEMS 
29.1. A culture of E. coli was grown on lactose in a mixed flow reactor (V = 
1 liter) using various flow rates of a CAo = 160 mg lactoselliter feed. The 
following results were obtained: 
- -- 
v, literlhr 
CA, mglliter 
Cell Concentration, Arbitrary 
0.2 
4 
15.6 
0.4 
10 
15 
0.8 
40 
12 
1.0 
100 
6 
Find a rate equation to represent this growth. 


=== PDF PAGE 658 ===
642 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
E. coli lives and grows on mannitol with the following kinetics 
r - 
'ACc, cA 
= gm mannitolim3, @ = 0.1 gm cells/gm mannitol 
'- 
c A + 2  
Find the outlet concentration of cells from the reactor when 1 m3/hr of 
mannitol solution (CAo = 6 gm/m3) is fed directly to a mixed flow reactor 
of volume 
Can you do better and produce more cells (if so, find Cc) by proper bypass or 
recycle of fluid from the reactor for the system of 
29.4. problem 2? 
29.5. problem 3? 
29.6. How curious-two 
different flow rates of CAo = 500 mol/m3 feed to our 
1 m3 mixed flow reactor produces the same 100 gmlhr of yeast cells in 
the exit stream, namely 
at 0.5 m3/hr of feed for which we find CA = 100 mol/m3 
at 1 m3/hr of feed for which we find CA = 300 mol/m3 
Substrate limiting Monod kinetics should well represent yeast formation. 
From this information, find 
(a) the fractional yield of yeast, 
(b) the kinetic equation for yeast formation, 
(c) the flow rate for maximum yeast production, 
(d) the maximum production rate of yeast. 
A stream of reactant A (CAo = 3, CRO = 0, CCO = 0) is to be decomposed 
by the following microbial fermentation 
In the following problems sketch your recommended reactor setup with recycle, 
bypass, etc., and on each sketch indicate pertinent quantities. 
What is the lowest C, which can be obtained in a single mixed flow reactor 
of size Vm = 1 for a feed rate of 


=== PDF PAGE 659 ===
Problems 643 
What is the lowest CA which can be obtained with two properly connected 
mixed flow reactors, each of volume V = 1, for a feed rate 
What is the lowest C, which can be obtained with three wisely connected 
mixed flow reactors, each of volume V, = 1, for a feed rate 
For a feed rate v = 3 what is the smallest size of plug flow reactor with 
appropriate piping (bypass or recycle or slide taps on the reactor) which 
will give 
29.13. C, = 0.5, side tap allowed 
29.14. Cc = 1.25, side tap not allowed 
29.15. Cc = 1.44, side tap allowed 
29.16. Find the lowest CA obtainable from a plug flow reactor of volume V, = 
4 (bypass, recycle and/or side taps are all allowed) for a feed rate v = 6 
29.17. Given the Monod equation to represent a microbial fermentation 
cells C 
A-R+C 
-rA= 
~ C A C C  
CA + constant 
Which of the contacting patterns of Fig. P29.17 could be optimum, and 
which can never be? By optimum we mean minimizing reactor volume 
for a feed consisting only of CAo. 
(4 
Figure P29.17 
29.18. In his thesis, which was published as a book in 1948, Monod first proposed 
the celebrated equation that bears his name. As experimental support for 
this equation he presented results from four batch reactor runs on the 


=== PDF PAGE 660 ===
644 
Chapter 29 Substrate-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
growth of a pure bacterial culture in a lactose solution (see Monod, 1958, 
p. 74). Here are the reported data for one of his runs. 
- 
- -  
Time Interval 
Number 
- 
At, hr 
C A 
cc 
0.54 
137 
15.5 to 23.0 
0.36 
114 
23.0 to 30.0 
0.33 
90 
30.0 to 38.8 
0.35 
43 
38.8 to 48.5 
0.37 
29 
48.5 to 58.3 
0.38 
9 
58.3 to 61.3 
0.37 
2 
61.3 to 62.5 
Fit the Monod equation to this data. 
29.19. In Example 29.le we could have used any one of the three contacting 
schemes shown in Fig. P29.19. We stated without proof that the bypass 
scheme was best. Show that this is so by calculating C,,,, for the three 
contacting schemes of Fig. P29.19. 
(a) 
Figure P29.19 


=== PDF PAGE 661 ===
Chapter 30 
Product-Limiting Microbial 
Fermentation 
With sufficient food and harmonious environment, cells multiply freely. However, 
no matter how much food is available, eventually either cells crowd each other 
out or their waste products inhibit their growth. We call this product poisoning. 
Hence, Monod kinetics always is a special case of a more general rate form 
which includes product poisoning. A simple equation of the general rate form 
for this situation is 
f 
order of product poisoning 
rate constant in a) 
t k o b s  decreases as 
poison-free environment 
product builds up 
In the special case of sufficient food, or C, + C,, and n = 1, the above equation 
reduces to the simplest expression for product poison control 
C
reaction stops when CR reaches C: 
We start with the rate form of Eq. 2, then we extend the treatment to systems 
where n Z 1, or Eq. 1. Let us also develop everything in terms of C, 
in which 
case Eq. 2 becomes 


=== PDF PAGE 662 ===
646 
Chapter 30 Product-Limiting Microbial Ferrnentatioi.l 
dr, - 
The maximum rate then occurs where - 
- 0. Solving gives 
~ C R  
1 
' R ,  ma, rate = (c, + cg - @ c,) 
Thus, there always is a composition where the rate is optimum. 
30.1 BATCH OR PLUG FLOW FERMENTORS FOR n = 1 
CA 
CAo 
cc 
CR 
Figure 30a 
To relate time to concentration, we integrate the performance expression of Eq. 3 
or in terms of product R, 
Graphically this performance equation is shown in Fig. 30.1. 
Since the llr, versus CR curve is U-shaped, the optimum way of running the 
plug flow reactor is shown in Fig. 30.2. 
1 
- 
rA 
Maximum rate 
r tb or 7p 
Figure 30.1 Graphical representation of Eq. 5. 


=== PDF PAGE 663 ===
30.2 Mired Flow Ferrnentors for n = 1 647 
At high conversion 
---------- 
At low conversion 
---------- 
1 
- 
'R 
here the rate is maximum 
0 
CR* 
2 
Figure 30.2 Optimum operation of a plug flow fermentor for poison limiting 
kinetics. 
30.2 MIXED FLOW FERMENTORS FOR n = 1 
For the case of negligible time lag for the feed cells which enter their new 
environment, and for high C, we have 
For the special case where C, 
= 0 and CRo = 0 the above general expression 
simplifies to 
for 
kr, > 1 
(10) 
To evaluate the kinetic constants from mixed flow experiments rearrange Eq. 
10 as in Eq. 11 and plot as shown in Fig. 30.3. 
The properties of Eq. 10 are displayed in Fig. 30.4. 


=== PDF PAGE 664 ===
648 
Chapter 30 Product-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
4 
Figure 30.3 Evaluation of the rate constants of 
Eq. 2 from data taken in a mixed flow reactor. 
Comments 
For mixed flow with C, 
= 0, C, 
= 0, and any high C,,. 
washout occurs at kr, = 1 for any feed 
maximum production rate of cells and product R is obtained at 
kr, = 2 .  . . and. . . C, = C$/2 
C~ opt 
c ~ O  
I 
Maximum possible CR 
Largest slope (the tangent to 
the cuwe) gives the highest 
production rate of R 
0 
1 
2 
--- -- -_ 
CA is high and close to constant 
CA 
This graph only for 
I 
c, 
= 0 
I 
Limiting ----7--
CA 
I 
c, 
= 0 
I 
I 
I 
Washout r' 
Optimum r is just double rwhwt 
Figure 30.4 Properties of the mixed flow equation for the kinetics of Eq. 2. 


=== PDF PAGE 665 ===
30.2 Mixed Flow Ferrnentors for n = 1 649 
the maximum production rate of cells and product is found to be 
the C, curve is similar in shape to the CR curve and is proportional to it. Thus, 
it rises from 0 to @ c;. 
Optimum operations for multistage systems follow the same pattern as for 
poison-free systems. The general rule is to use mixed flow to reach the 
maximum rate in one step. Proceed beyond this with plug flow. 
Note that the maximum rate occurs at Cg/2 when C, 
= 0 and CRo = 0. 
Fermentation with n # 1 Poison Limiting Kinetics 
For n-th order product poisoning kinetics the rate equation is 
These kinetics are displayed in Fig. 30.5. The performance equation for plug 
flow is quite messy; however, for mixed flow the performance equation can be 
obtained directly. Thus in general, for Cco # 0 and CRo # 0 we have 
Figure 30.5 Reaction slowdown is strongly depen- 
dent on the order of poisoning, n. 


=== PDF PAGE 666 ===
Chapter 30 Product-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
4 
CR, opt = 
CR 
Conditions of maximum production 
kVC& n n  
FR, max = ( C ~ v ) o ~ t  
= --- 
(n + I)"+ I 
t 
rate 
k7m 
Figure 30.6 Behavior of a mixed flow reactor for the poison influenced kinetics of Eq. 12. 
and for the special case where Ca = 0 and C,, 
= 0 
The properties of this equation, washout, maximum production, etc. are displayed 
in Fig. 30.6. To find the kinetic constants Cg, k and n from experiment first 
evaluate Cg in a batch run using an excess of reactant A and letting t -+ w. Then 
rearrange the mixed flow performance equation to give 
log 7, = -log k + n log (ci"",j 
and plot as shown in Fig. 30.7. This will give the kinetic constants k and n. 
O
F
i
 
log (-) CF? 
1 
log - 
k 
Figure 30.7 Finding the order of product poisoning and the 
rate constant of Eq. 12 from mixed flow reactor data. 


=== PDF PAGE 667 ===
30.2 Mixed Flow Ferrnentors farrt = 1 651 
Discussion 
The similarity in shape of the mixed flow graphs for product-limiting and sub- 
strate-limiting (Monod) kinetics (Fig. 29.5 and Fig. 30.4), has led many investiga- 
tors to fit product poisoning systems with the simple Monod equation. The fit 
will be good, but don't try to use the fitted equation for different feed conditions. 
Your predictions are likely to be way off because the logic of the extension 
is wrong. 
You must first find which of these two factors is rate limiting. This is easy to 
do, so there is no excuse for using the wrong expression. In one case the final 
extent of reaction is dependent on C, 
and not on CRo; in the other case just 
the opposite holds. The discussion and sketches of Chapter 28 show this. 
Expressions for related situations such as plug flow with recycle, and where 
both substrate and product both affect the rate are developed by Levenspiel 
(1996) Chapter 84. 
FRUIT FLY COCKTAIL 
Crushed fruit flies (A) ferment to produce an aromatic alcoholic drink (R) with 
product-limiting kinetics estimated as follows: 
n = 1 in a springtime operation 
Cg = 0.12 kg alclkg solution 
p = 1000 kg/m3 
What is the most alcohol you can produce (kglhr) in a commercial-sized mixed 
flow reactor (V, = 30 m3)? Also calculate the concentration of alcohol in the 
cocktail, and the feed rate needed of fragrant fresh frappCed fluit fries. 
From the given data and from Fig. 30.4, we find the conditions which yield the 
optimum. Thus 
kg alc - 
C ~ ,  
opt = cg 
120 kg 
= 60 - 
- 6% alcohol 
-=( 
2 
m3 
) 2  
m3 
Again, from Fig. 30.4 we find 


=== PDF PAGE 668 ===
652 
Chapter 30 Product-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
and 
v 
But rapt = - 
SO the optimum feed rate is 
Vopt 
I/ - 30v3 - 25.98 m3/hr 
"opt = < - - 
- 
2 
The production rate of alcohol, again from Fig. 30.4, is 
REFERENCES 
Levenspiel, O., Chemical Reactor Omnibook, Chapter 84, OSU Bookstores, Corvallis, 
OR, 1996. 
PROBLEMS 
Material R is to be produced from the following microbial fermentation, 
using a feed stream C, 
= lo6, CRo = 0, Cco = 0. All quantities are given 
in consistent SI units. 
C, 
= 50 
A % R + C  
with cg = 12 
In each of the following problems sketch your recommended reactor setup and 
on the sketch indicate pertinent quantities. 
What CR is obtainable in a single mixed flow reactor of size Vm = 1 for a feed rate 
30.1. . . . v = 1 
30.2. . . . v = 4 
What CR is obtainable using two mixed flow reactors, each of volume 
Vm = 1, for a feed rate 
30.3. . . . v = 1 
30.4. . . . v = 3 


=== PDF PAGE 669 ===
Problems 653 
For a feed rate v = 3 what size of plug flow reactor with appropriate 
piping, recycle, bypass or anything you want to use is needed to give 
30.8. The microbial fermentation of A produces R as follows 
10A + Cell + 18R + 2 Cells 
and experiments in a mixed flow reactor with CAo = 250 mol/m3 show that 
CR = 24 mol/m3 when r = 1.5 hr 
CR = 30 mol/m3 when r = 3.0 hr 
In addition, there seems to be a limiting upper value for CR at 36 moll 
m3 for any r,,, , CA, or CC. 
From this information determine how to maximize the fractional yield 
of R, or @I, 
from a feed stream of 10 m3/hr of CAo = 350 mol/rn3. Cell 
or product separation and recycle are not practical in this system, so only 
consider a once-through system. Present your answer as a sketch showing 
reactor type, reactor volume, CR in the exit stream, and the moles of R 
producedlhr. 
In spring the fermentation of fruit flies proceeds with n = 1 kinetics, as 
shown in Example 30.1. However, in winter or summer, maybe because 
of a difference in temperature, the poisoning proceeds differently. So 
repeat Example 30.1 with one change: 
1 
30.9. in winter, n = - 
2 
30.10. in summer, n = 2 
Note: To tell how the value of n affects the reactor performance, compare 
your answers here with the answer in Example 30.1. 
30.11. Shredded chemical reactor textbooks are degraded to glucose in a pilot 
plant well stirred fermenter (V, = 50 lit) under the action of a word 
gobbling bug. With a large excess of these shredded incomprehensible 
words, the presence of glucose becomes the rate limiting factor. We sum- 
marize the findings as follows 
when v = 16 bookslhr 
CR = 54 pmol/liter 
when v = 4 bookslhr 
CR = 75 pmolllit 
when v + 0 
CR + 90 pmolllit 
Determine the flow rate of books which maximizes glucose production 
per word gobbled up, and find this production rate. 


=== PDF PAGE 670 ===
654 
Chapter 30 Product-Limiting Microbial Fermentation 
30.12. Professor Microbe has submitted a paper for publication in which he 
studied the growth of a new strain of bug in a mixed flow fermenter 
(V, = 46.4) using a pure substrate feed (C,, = 150, CR0 = Cco = 0). His 
raw data is as follows 
20.0 
125 
with @ = 0.5 
22.0 
150 (washout) 
He asserts, without giving details, that this data clearly represents poison- 
limiting kinetics with rate constants 
The reviewer of the paper, Dr. Ferment, counters that Microbe is quite 
wrong, that the data in fact represents substrate limiting Monod kinetics 
with 
But, out of orneriness, he didn't present the details of his calculations 
either. The editor can't determine who is right (this is not his field), so 
he sends the paper and the review to duWayne Zuelhsdorff. What is 
duwayne's answer? Is Microbe, or Ferment, or both, or neither, right? 


=== PDF PAGE 671 ===
Appendix-Miscellany 
A. Newton's Law 
f 
at earth's surface a = g = 9.806 m/s2 
I kg.m 
  conversion factor: g, = - 
s2.N 
B. Length 
1010 
lo6 
39.37 
3.280 83 
1 
0.000 6214 
angstrom 
micron 
inch 
foot 
ml 
mile 
C. Volume 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
in3 
fluid oz 
liter 
US gal Imp. gal 
it3 (hhl (oil) 
42 US gal 
55 US gal 
D. Mass 
lb 
short ton 
metric ton 
avoirdupois 
C ,000 ,b 
C or "tonne" ?y2:ybn 


=== PDF PAGE 672 ===
656 
Appendix-Miscellany 
E. Pressure 
N 
kg 
dyne 
ThePasca1:lPa = I-= 
I-= 
10- 
m2 
m.s2 
cm2 
lb 
1 atm = 760 mm Hg = 14.696 f 
= 29.92 in Hg = 33.93 ft H20 = 101 325 Pa 
in2 
1 bar = lo5 Pa . . . close to 1 atm, sometimes called a technical atmosphere 
1 inch H20 = 248.86 Pa = 250 Pa 
F. Work, Energy, and Heat 
kg.m2 
Thejou1e:l J = 1 N . m =  1- s2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
erg 
ft . lbf 
cal 
kgf. m lit. atm Btu 
kcal 
Hp . hr 
kW . hr 
f 
G. Molecular Weight 
In SI units: 
kg 
( m ~ ) , ~  
= 0.032 - 
rnol 
kg 
(mw),, = 0.0289 - 
... etc. 
rnol 
H. Ideal 
the gas/ 
\ kgIm3 
contstant 
8.314 - 
rnol . K 
R =  
cal - 
ft3 . atm 
= 1.987 - 
- 0.7302 lb mol. 
rnol . K 
liter. atm - 
= 0.082 06 
m3. atm 
Btu 
= 82.06 X - 
m01 . K - 1.987 lb rnol. OR 
m01 . K 
- 
- 
Pa liter 
= 8314 ------ 
rnol . K 


=== PDF PAGE 673 ===
Appendix-Miscellany 
657 
I. Viscosity (p) 
kg 
The poiseuille: 1 P1 = - 
m.s 
for water: p,,., = 
P1 
for gases: p = 
P1 
for air: 
p 2 ~ - ~  
= 1.8 X 
P1 
J. Density p = [s] 
kg 
for water: p = 1000 - 
m3 
p(mw) & (101 325)(0.0289) = 
for ideal gas: p = - 
- 
kg 
RT 2wc 
(8.314)(293) 
m3 
K. Diffusivity CB and !3, 
= [?I 
in liquids 
gas in porous media in 
in gas 
Knudsen regime, or small 
+ 
pore diameter 
commercial 
catalyst 
(gas at 1 atm)< 
gas in porous media for large 
pore diameter, or bulk diffusion 
independent of n ... for liquids 
1 
G27 cc T3I2, !3 cc - ... for bulk diffusion of gases 
n 
!3 O= TIi2, independent of n ... for Knudsen diffusion of gases 
In a tube of diameter d Knudsen diffusion occurs when nd < 0.01, Pa. m. 
In this situation. 


=== PDF PAGE 674 ===
658 
Appendix-Miscellany 
In gas or any fluid: !2 = 
Dimensions: I 
In a porous structure: !2 = m solid. s 
L. Concentration CA = [ m ~n":id ] 
mol 
lb mol 
I-= 
6.24 X lo-'- 
m3 
ft3 
0.1 
1 
10 
102 
103 
104 
105 
M. Thermal Conductivity k and ken = [s] 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
4 
A 
-C------) 
4 
* 
gases 
liquids and 
water 
metals 
H2 gas 
I 
t 
I 
I 
insuiators C 
nonmetals; porous structures; alumina, 
silica, activated carbon, etc. 
1% in gas at 
pure gas at 
1 N 
pure gas at pure 
1 atm, 1000K 
1 atm, 273K 
aqueous 
1000 atm, 
water 
273K 
W 
cal - 
Btu 
1 - 
= 0.239 - 
- 0.578 hr. ft. 
m.K 
m.K.s 
k and keff are independent of n 
I 
In gas or liquid: k = 
W 
[ rn fluid K] 
Dimensions: 
In porous structures: k,, = m structure. 
"
1
 
K 


=== PDF PAGE 675 ===
Appendix-Miscellany 
659 
N. Heat Transfer Coefficient h = - 
[mFK] 
W 
cal 
- 
Btu 
1 - 
= 0.239 
- 0.176 hr. ft2. 
m2.K 
rn2.K.s 
Gas to particle: h = 8 - 1200 
Gas to fine entrained particles (fast fluidized systems, FCC, etc.) h = 1000-1200 
Liquid to particle: h = 80 - 1200 
- 1 for gases 
10 for liquids 
hd 
In packed beds: Nu = 
= 2 + 1.8(~e,)l'~ (pr)lI3 
k 
... Rep > 100 
0. Mass Transfer Coefficient kg = m2 surface s 
Gas to particle: kg = 0.02 - 2 
- 1 for gases 
Liquid to particle: kg = 2 x 
-2 x 
f' 
= 1000 for liquids 
In packed beds: Sh = 
= 2 + 1 . 8 ( ~ e , ) l ~  
(sc)"~ 
. . . Rep > 80 
For gases: kg 
l l r  
moles of A disappearing 
P. Rate of Reaction -fi = 
m3 of thing s 
1 
I 
human being 
at rest 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
. . . 
coal furnaces 
4 
t 
cellular rxs., 
industrial water 
treatment plants 
jet engines 
rocket engines 
bimolecular reaction in 
which every collision 
counts, -1 atm, and 400°C 
... 4 
. . . 
working hard 
gases in porous 
catalyst particles 
4 
+ 


=== PDF PAGE 676 ===
660 
Appendix-Miscellany 
Q. Dimensionless Groups 
iviscous effects 
P- 
molecular momentum transfer ... Schmidt number 
molecular mass transfer 
a 
\diffusion 
effects 
- 
- 
- lo-' 
= 10' . f o r  liquids 
(10~)(10-~) 
/viscous effects 
t 
= % = molecular momentum transfer .. Prandtl number 
k 
molecular heat transfer 
heat conduction 
= 0.66 - 0.75 for air, A, COz, CH4, CO, H2, He, N2, and other common gases 
r 1.06 for steam 
= 10 - 1000 for most liquids 
= 0.006 - 0.03 for most liquid metals 
(inertial effects 
t 
Re = dup = 
total momentum transfer 
P- 
molecular momentum transfer ... Reynolds number 
L \ 
viscous effects 
f 
turbulent and laminar, conduction and convection 
t 
hd 
total heat transfer 
= k = molecular heat transfer ... Nusselt number 
t 
heat conduction alone 
k d 
Sh = g 
= 
total mass transfer 
molecular mass transfer ... Sherwood number 
d u p C ~  - (Re)(pr) = total momentum transfer 
@=k- 
... Peclet number 
molecular heat transfer 
= $ = (Re)(Sc) = total momentum transfer ... Bodenstein number 
molecular mass transfer 
fluid overtaking caused by molecular diffusion, velocity differences, 
( turbulent eddier etc. 
- 
- movement by longitudinal dispersion . .. dispersion groups 
movement by bulk flow 


=== PDF PAGE 677 ===
This is a new and different type of dimensionless group introduced by workers 
in chemical reaction engineering. Unfortunately someone started calling the 
reciprocal of this group the Peclet number-this 
is wrong. It is neither the Peclet 
number nor its mass transfer analog, which is widely called the Bodenstein 
number in Europe. The difference rests in the use of D in place of 93; hence, 
these groups have completely different meanings. 
A name is needed for this group. Until one is chosen let us use: 
- intensity of axial dispersion 
ud "' 
- 
... vessel dispersion number. 
uL 


=== PDF PAGE 678 ===


=== PDF PAGE 679 ===
Name Index 
Abrahamson, A.A., 448,470 
Adams, J., 252 
Ananthakrishnan, V., 339, 
348 
Aris, R., 299, 311, 317, 385, 
387, 389, 417 
Arrhenius, A., 27, 72 
Barduhn, A.J., 339, 348 
Bashby, B., 78 
Bennackers, A.A.C.M., 161, 
164, 317 
Bergougnou, M.A., 470 
Berty, J., 398, 417 
Bi, H.T., 467, 468,470 
Binns, D.T., 245, 246 
Bischoff, K.B., 314, 315, 317, 
389, 392, 417,430, 443 
Bliss, H., 417 
Bodenstein, M., 82 
Bosworth, R.C.L., 346, 348 
Boudart, M., 381, 417 
Brahme, P.H., 517 
Briggs, G.E., 37 
Broucek, R., 399 
Butt, J.B., 400, 417 
Butt, W.M., 81 
Carberry, J.J., 392, 393, 398, 
406,417, 581, 586 
Cates, D.L., 200 
Catipovic, N., 193, 200 
Chandan, B., 206 
Chou, C.H., 417 
Choudhary, V.R., 511,516 
Cleland, F.A., 346,348 
Corcoran, W.H., 110,115 
Corrigan, T.E., 204,380,417 
Cresswell, D.L., 393, 417 
Curl, R.L., 360, 365 
Danckwerts, P.V., 258, 277, 
360, 365, 531, 535, 537, 
538, 539,564 
Das, K., 621 
Davidson, J.F., 454, 455, 457, 
470 
den Hartog, H.W., 325, 335 
Denbigh, K.G., 158, 164, 193, 
194, 196, 197, 200, 251, 
346, 348 
Dolbear, A.E., 35 
Doraiswamy, L.K., 517, 535, 
537 
Einstein, A., 360 
Ergun, S., 449, 470 
Fabre, H., 34 
Fan, L.S., 468, 470 
Feller, W., 364, 365 
Fillesi, P., 140 
Fitzgerald, T.J., 140 
Froessling, N., 401, 417, 578, 
586 
Froment, G.F., 389,417, 430, 
443 
Frost, A.A., 77 
Gangiah, K., 245, 246 
Geldart, D., 448, 470 
Ghose, T.K., 621 
Gill, W.N. 339,348 
Gillham, A.J., 564 
Gilliland, E.R., 453, 470 
Govindarao, V.M.H., 518 
Grace, J.R., 451,467,470 
Green, D.W., 535, 537 
Haider, A., 449, 470 
Haldane, J.B .S., 37 
Han, K., 629 
Harrell, J.E., 325, 335 
Harrison, D., 454, 470 
Hatta, S., 529, 534, 537 
Hegedus, L., 496 
Hellin, M., 80 
Hicks, J.S., 392, 418 
Higbie, R., 457, 531, 537 
Hoftijzer, P.J., 530, 537, 558, 
562 
Holmes, D.B., 325, 335 
Holmes, S., 117 
Horn, F., 432, 434, 443 
Hottel, H.C., 585, 586 
Hougen, O.A., 380,417 
Hull, D.E., 318 
Husain, A., 245,246 
Hutchings, J., 393, 417 
Ishida, M., 581, 586 
Jackson, R., 237 
Jagadeesh, V., 318 
Johnson, M.M., 348 


=== PDF PAGE 680 ===
664 
Name Index 
Jones, R.W., 131, 147 
Jungers, J.C., 33, 80, 182, 183, 
200 
Kantyka, T.A., 245,246 
Kelly, B., 564 
Kent, J.W., 318 
Kimura, S., 470 
Kitterell, J.R., 498 
Knudsen, C.W., 453, 470 
Konoki, K.K., 432, 434, 443 
Krishnaswamy, S., 498 
Kunii, D., 447, 452, 456, 468, 
469, 470, 570, 574, 581, 
582, 585, 586, 596, 597, 
604, 605 
Kunugita, E., 498 
Lacey, W.N., 110, 115 
Lago, R.M., 380,417 
Laidler, K.J., 33, 77 
Levenspiel, O., 134, 147, 193, 
200, 301, 302, 304, 310, 
314, 315, 317, 345, 348, 
360, 365, 393, 417, 447, 
449, 452, 456, 464, 468, 
469, 470, 477, 490, 492, 
495, 546, 570, 582, 586, 
597, 604, 605, 629, 640, 
641, 651,652 
Levien, K.L., 348 
Lindemann, F.A., 21, 33 
MacMullin, R.B., 193, 200, 
323, 335 
Magoo, S.E., 77 
Mathis, J.F., 471 
McGreavy, C., 393,417 
Menten, M.L., 21, 26, 33, 37, 
79, 613, 619 
Michaelis, L., 21, 26, 33, 37, 
79, 613, 619 
Monod, J., 634, 641 
Moore, W.J., 33 
Murthy, K.V.R., 518 
Nelson, Lord, 169 
Ng, D.Y.C., 360, 365 
Novick, A., 634, 641 
Obando, R., 237 
Ogg, R., 36 
Ottino, J.M., 365 
Parker, A.L., 585, 586 
Partridge, B.A., 455, 470 
Paul, E.L., 365 
Pearson, R.G., 77 
Pease, R.N., 110 
Perona, J.J., 325, 335 
Perry, R.H., 535, 537 
Piret, E.L., 243, 246 
Polthier, 318 
Prater, C.C., 380, 392, 417 
Ramachandran, P.A., 511, 
516 
Ranz, W.E., 401,418 
Rippin, D.W.T., 360, 365 
Rowe, P.N., 455,470 
Sandy, R., 205 
Satterfield, C.N., 418, 420 
Satyanarayana, M., 318 
Senior, M.G., 237 
Shah, Y.T., 535,537 
Sharma, M.M., 535, 537 
Shen, J., 581, 586 
Shimizu, F.J., 574, 586 
Shimoyama, S., 597, 605 
Shirai, T., 586 
Sir Boss, 117 
Sjenitzer, 319 
Smith, J.M., 581, 586 
Smith, W.K., 301, 317 
Spielman, L.A., 360, 365 
Standish, N., 318 
Summers, 496 
Suzuki, M., 360, 365 
Szepe, S., 134, 147, 477, 491, 
495 
Szilard, L., 634, 641 
Takagi, K., 597, 605 
Tartarelli, R., 406, 418 
Taylor, G.I., 311, 317 
Teller, A.J., 524, 537 
Thiele, E.W., 384, 385, 387, 
389,418 
Thornton, J.M., 417 
Trambouze, P.J., 243, 246 
Treybal, R.E., 365 
van der Laan, E.T., 300, 317 
van der Vusse, J.G., 246, 253, 
325, 335 
van Heerden, C., 226,228, 
237 
van Krevelens, D.W., 530, 
537, 558, 562 
van Swaaij, W.P.M., 161, 164, 
317 
Villadsen, J., 399, 418 
Villeneuve, Admiral, 168, 169 
von Rosenberg, D.U., 306, 
317 
Voncken, R.M., 325, 335 
Wagner-Weisz-Wheeler, 388 
Walas, S., 380, 418 
Walker, C.A., 417 
Wang, S.C., 581,586 
Watson, C.C., 471 
Watson, Dr., 118 
Watson, K.M., 380, 417 
Weber, M., 323, 335 
Wedel, S., 399, 418 
Wehner, J.F., 313, 317 
Weisz, P.B., 385, 392, 418 
Welland, R.C., 245, 246 
Weller, S., 381, 418 
Wen, C.Y., 581, 582, 586 
Westerterp, K.R., 161, 164, 
317 
Wheeler, A., 405, 418 
White, D.E., 581, 586 
Wilhelm, R.H., 313, 317, 346, 
348 
Yagi, S. 570, 581, 585, 586, 
596, 597, 605 
Yoshida, K., 574, 586 
Zhu, J.X., 467, 470 
Zuelhsdorff, duWayne, 654 
Zwietering, Th.N., 355, 365 


=== PDF PAGE 681 ===
Subject Index 
Absorber-reactors 
choice of reactor, 540-543 
design chart, 530 
examples and problems, 
551-565 
performance equations, 
546-551 
rate equation, 527-534 
Absorbers, 524-527 
performance equations, 
453-456 
Acrolein production, 252 
Activation energy 
in strong diffusion regime, 
390 
of reactions, 27 
Aggregation, 258, 350 
Antifreeze, production, 248 
Autocatalytic reactions, 140 
Axial dispersion 
definition, 293 
in packed beds, 311 
in pipe flow, 310 
intensity, 309 
model, 295 
Batch reactor, 38- 
basic performance equa- 
tion, 91 
constant volume, 39 
first order kinetics, 41 
half life method, 48 
homogeneous catalyzed 
reactions, 50 
n-th order kinetics, 46 
reactions in parallel, 49 
reactions in series, 53 
reactions of shifting order, 
59 
reversible reactions, 56 
search for a rate equation, 
75 
second order kinetics, 42 
third order kinetics, 45 
varying volume, 67-72 
zero order kinetics, 47 
Battle of Trafalgar, 168 
Benzene chlorination prob- 
lem, 252 
Bodenstein number, 339, 660 
BR. see Batch reactor 
Catalyst 
homogeneous, 50 
solid, 376 
Catalytic reactions 
general rate equation, 391 
heat effects during, 391 
in real catalysts, 405 
influencing factors, 378 
kinetic equations, 379 
kinetic regimes, 378 
multiple reactions, 403 
pore diffusion effects, 381, 
403 
Catalytic kinetics 
controlling resistance, 
401-402 
in a single pore, 381 
pore diffusion intrusion, 
381 
porous particle, 385 
rate of reaction, 386 
surface reaction, 379 
Catalytic reactors 
comparison, 400 
experimental, 396-401 
performance equations, 
393-396 
CFB, 465-470 
contacting regimes, 448 
downflow CFB, 468 
fast fluidized, FF, 467 
jet impact reactor, 470 
pneumatic conveying, PC, 
468 
turbulent bed, TB, 466 
Chemostat, 641 
Circulating fluidized bed, see 
CFB 
Classification of reactions, 2 
Closed vessels, 300 
mean and variance 300 
Coca-Cola problem, 250 
Cold shot cooling, 434 
Compartment models, 
284-287 
diagnosing reactor ills, 287 
Convection model, 339 
E curves, 342 
F curves, 344 
for general kinetics, 345 
for n = 0,1, 2 reactions, 
346 
for reactions-in-series, 347 
when to be used, 339, 341 


=== PDF PAGE 682 ===
666 
Subject Index 
Conversion-concentration 
relationship, 86-88 
Convolution example, 272 
Convolution integral, 270 
CSTR, see Mixed flow reactor 
Davidson bubble, 454 
Deactivating catalysts, 473 
design of reactors, 489 
mechanism, 474 
optimum reactor policy, 
491 
order of deactivation, 476 
pore diffusion effects, 483 
rate equations, 475 
rate from experiment, 
477-483 
Denbigh reactions, 194-198 
problem, 251 
Differential method of analy- 
sis, 39 
batch data, 63 
catalytic, 397 
example, 65 
Dilution rate, 641 
Dirac delta function, 275 
Dispersion, see axial dis- 
persion 
Dispersion model, 293 
for large DIuL, 299 
for n = 1 reactors, 
312-315 
for n = 2 reactors, 315 
for open vessels, 300 
for reactors, 312 
for small DluL, 296 
Dispersion number, 294, 296 
Downflow CFB, 468 
E curve, 262 
for convection model, 342 
for dispersion model, 297, 
299 
for tanks-in-series model, 
323 
Eadie plot, 615 
Earliness of mixing, 259, 350, 
354 
conversion for, 273, 351 
Effectiveness factor, 384, 391 
Enhancement factor, 529 
Enzyme fermentation, 611 
Equilibrium from thermo, 210 
examples, 213 
Expansion factor, 86 
Exponential integral 
table. 353 
F curve, 264 
for convection model, 344 
for dispersion model, 
302-304 
for tanks-in-series model, 
327 
Fast fluidization, FF, 467 
Fermentation, 611 
Fermentation by enzymes, 
611-622 
Fermentor, microbial, 623 
batch, 624, 630 
fractional yield, 626 
kinetics, 627 
mixed flow, 625 
Monod equation, 628 
product distribution, 626 
product limiting, 645 
substrate limiting, 630 
Fermentor performance 
for mixed flow, 633,647 
for plug flow, 630, 646 
optimum operations, 636 
Flow models 
see axial dispersion, 293 
see compartment, 283 
see convection, 339 
see tanks-in-series, 321 
which to use, 339, 341 
Fluid-fluid systems, see Ab- 
sorber-reactors 
Fluid-solid reactions 
models, 568-582 
Fluid-solid reactors, 589 
for a size mixture, 591 
instantaneous reactions, 
603 
mixed flow of solids, 
594-600 
Fluidized beds, 447 
3 phase, 500 
BFB, 451 
circulating solids, 465-470 
flow diagram, 451 
flow models, 452-455 
flow regimes, 448 
Geldart classification, 448 
K-L model, 455-463 
minimum velocity, 449 
terminal velocity, 449 
Fluidized reactors, 458 
conversion equation, 459 
example, 460 
Fractional yield, 242 
in fermentors, 626 
Gas-solid systems, see Fluid- 
solid 
Geldart classification, 448 
GILIS reactions, 500-511 
application, 510 
choice of reactor, 509 
examples and problems, 
511-519 
rate equation, 500-503 
reactor performance, 
503-509 
Hatta number, 529 
role in reactors, 534 
Heat effects in catalytic reac- 
tions, 391 
Heat of reaction, 208 
Heterogeneous reactions, 
definition, 2 
Holding time, 109 
Homogeneous reactions, 
definition, 2 
Ideal reactors, 90-112 
table of performance 
equations, 111, 112 
Inhibition 
competitive, 617 
noncompetitive, 617 
Integral method of analysis, 
38 
batch data, 41 
catalytic, 397 
example, 60 
Jet impact reactor, 470 


=== PDF PAGE 683 ===
Subject Index 667 
K-L model 
assumptions, 455 
examples, 460 
for multiple reactions, 463 
for single reactions, 458 
material balance, 456 
Kinetics of deactivating cata- 
lysts 
distortion by pore diffu- 
sion, 483 
from experiment, 477-483 
Laminar flow model, see con- 
vection model 
Lineweaver plot, 615 
Liquid-solid systems, see 
Fluid-solid 
Macro fluids, 351 
conversion equations, 352, 
353 
lifetime of an element, 360 
reactor tables, 356 
Maximization of rectangles, 
133 
Maximizing operations 
definitions, 242, 243 
Mean of a tracer curve, 294, 
300, 301 
for the dispersion model, 
294,300, 301 
for the tanks-in-series 
model, 323 
MFR, see Mixed flow reactor 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics, 
612 
in mixed flow, 614 
in plug flow, 613 
Microbial fermentation, 611, 
623 
Minimum fluidizing velocity, 
449 
Mixed flow reactor, 
basic performance equa- 
tion, 96 
comparison with plug flow, 
122 
Mixing of two fluids, 361 
effect on product distribu- 
tion, 363 
Models, see Flow models 
Models for fluid-solid reac- 
tions 
finding the rate controlling 
step, 582 
for constant size particles, 
570-579 
for shrinking particles, 
577-579 
progressive conversion, 
568 
shrinking core, 569 
table of kinetics, 580 
Modulus 
Hatta, 529, 530 
Thiele, 391, 394 
Wagner, 388, 391 
Monod equation, 628, 641 
Multiple reactors, 124 
best arrangement, 135 
comparison with plug flow, 
128 
Open vessels, 300 
mean and variance, 301 
Optimum reactor policy 
with deactivating catalyst, 
491 
Order of deactivation, 476 
Order of product poisoning, 
645 
Packed bed catalytic reactor, 
427 
choice of reactor type, 435 
staged plug flow, 430 
staged mixed flow 432 
staged reactors, 430 
staged recycle, 432 
Parallel reactions, 153 
examples, 159, 161, 163 
in mixed flow, 157 
in plug flow, 157 
Particle size 
effective, 386 
Particles 
size, 450 
shape, 450 
Peclet number, 660 
Performance equation, 2 
Plug flow reactor, 
basic performance equa- 
tion, 94 
comparison with mixed 
flow, 122 
Pneumatic conveying (PC), 
468 
Pore diffusion 
effect on deactivating cata- 
lysts, 483-486 
PRF, see Plug flow reactor 
Problems 
acrolein production, 252 
Battle of Trafalgar, 168 
benzene chlorination, 252 
chirping crickets, 35 
Coca-Cola problem, 250 
electric power stations, 8 
FCC reactors, reaction 
rate, 9 
flow in blast furnaces, 317 
gambling Bashby, 78 
gambling Magoo, 77 
garbage collection, 205 
grinding of paint pigment, 
202 
making dollar bills, 335 
phthalic anhydride produc- 
tion, 254 
pollution of the Ohio 
River, 319 
popcorn popping popcorn 
popper, 89 
rock and gravel, 205 
running speed of ants, 34 
Sherlock Holmes mystery, 
117 
Slobbovian wars, 205 
storage of radioactive 
wastes, 336 
Trambouze reactions, 248 
van der Vusse reactions, 
253 
water treatment plants, 8 
Product distribution 
effect of activation energy, 
236 
effect of temperature, 235 
Proper choice of reactors, 
240-242 


=== PDF PAGE 684 ===
668 
Subject Index 
Rate constant, k, 75 
Reaction rate, 
Arrhenius law, 27 
change with temperature, 
28,72 
order of reaction, 16 
predictions, 32 
rate constant, 27 
temperature dependent 
term, 27 
Reaction rate, definition, 3, 
13,14 
how fast or slow, 5 
Reactions 
elementary, 15 
kinetic models, 18 
parallel, 15 
Michaelis-Menten, 25 
molecularity, 16 
non-elementary, 15 
searching for a mecha- 
nism, 29 
series, 15 
shift in mechanism, 31 
Reactions in parallel, see Par- 
allel reactions 
Reactions in series, 170 
first order irreversible, 170 
in laminar flow, 347 
in mixed flow, 175 
in plug flow or batch, 173 
reversible, 181 
Reactor design, 
introduction, 83 
Reactor ills, 288 
Reactor performance equa- 
tion, 2 
Reactor types, 14 
Recycle reactor, 136 
comparison with plug flow, 
139 
optimum recycle, 142 
RTD, 257 
experimental methods, 261 
definition of the E curve, 
260 
F, C, E curves, 264,266 
pulse experiment, 262 
step experiment, 263 
Selectivity, definition, 158 
Segregation, 258, 350 
Semibatch reactor, 83 
Series-parallel reactions 
examples, 192 
Denbigh network, 194 
general rules, 187 
graphical representation, 
190, 191 
irreversible, 181 
plug flow or batch, 188 
Sherlock Holmes mystery, 
117 
Slurry reactors, see GILIS 
reactors 
Solubility and rate, 534 
Space-time, 93, 109 
Space-velocity, 93 
Speed of reactions, 5 
Sphericity of particles, 450 
Steady-state flow reactor, 83 
Substrate, 641 
Tanks-in-series model, 321 
closed recirculation sys- 
tem, 325 
E curve, 323 
F curve, 327 
for general kinetics, 328 
for n = 1 reactors, 328 
for n = 2 reactors, 328 
for reactors, 328 
Temperature and pressure, 
207- 
adiabatic operations, 220 
design chart, 219 
effect on reactions, 215 
equilibrium constant, 210 
multiple reactions, 235 
non-adiabatic operations, 
223 
reactor examples, 229-235 
single reaction, 207 
AH,, 207 
Terminal velocity, 449 
Thiele modulus, 391 
definition, 384 
for different kinetics, 389 
generalized, 389 
Three-phase reactors, see GI 
LIS reactors 
Trafalgar, 168 
Trickle bed reactor, see G/L/S 
reactors 
Turbidostat, 641 
Turbulent fluidized bed, TB, 
466 
Unsteady-state flow reactor, 
83 
Variance of a tracer curve 
definition, 294 
for the dispersion model, 
294, 300, 301 
for the tanks-in-series 
model, 323 
Wagner-Weisz-Wheeler mod- 
ulus, 388, 391 
Xylene oxidation problem, 
247 
Yield, fractional, 242 
